Which is in Zoom and in person, uh, so Mary Henry
and DRTs Ford.
Cartwright. I'm not sure who we have in the room
and who's online, but either way, uh,
for those online, oh, wonderful.
Dr. Tres, nice to see you again.
Did We have, did you know
that me was in the room or not?
I understand she's in the room.
I was just talking to her on the phone.
Uh, what I'm thinking she's got the screen up.
That's just saying, you know,
the screensaver about the parliamentary house
of representative, so I couldn't go any further than that
until someone sent me a link to become a panelist. How
Do you think she's online's?
She's definitely online. She's definitely online.
No, that's okay. Sorry. And the reason I was checking
that, um, is on, on our, my paperwork, it says in room
and on Zoom in, you know, in the room and on Zoom.
So you're obviously both online. Totally fine. Oh, yeah.
Cool, cool. Yeah. Okay,
so hopefully we've got medi accepting the,
um, panel
request. Has she
Here? She's
Beautiful.
Welcome Medi. Thank you for joining us. Uh, to both of you.
Uh, we have 10 minutes of time for your submission.
That includes time for questions,
and you can take the submission as read too.
So the time is over to you. Now
We present the so submission on behalf of URI through,
I am the education manager for te.
My professional background is in primary education.
I currently provide iwi led pastoral support
to initial teacher trainees undertaking the bachelor
of primary teaching through the University of Waikato.
Also, in my role as the education lead,
I represent the Nauto voice
and engagement in
engagement with English medium schools in KUKA
and work collaboratively with other
KU Iwi education representatives.
In my private capacity, I sit as the presiding member at one
of our English medium primary schools within, apologies.
Apologies for that call.
We are here to state our absolute opposition
to the education and training system Reform amendment Bill
Therese Ford.
I met, um, many of you not last week, the week
before, so I'm back as a descendant of
Naka tour like media.
We come from a number of the tribes
that make up the collectives of Naka,
and we also came from the same marai.
So we are cousins, uh, and we're also both teachers.
I started teaching in 1996,
so this year marks my 30th year as an educator.
I've held numerous roles over these three decades,
including teaching
and senior leadership positions in both primary
and secondary English, medium schools,
and tertiary education at a university.
I've been a board member, an educational researcher,
and a professional learning facilitator
for the past 16 years, and I continue to hold these roles.
I draw from my experiences to support media in her role
as the education manager for TEGA or Naka.
I reiterate that Naka strongly opposes the education
and training system reform amendment bill.
This is not merely a policy disagreement,
it is a formal challenge to a bill that we believe
represents an unprecedented politicization of education
and a direct breach of the Maori crown relationship.
Before we share the two specific points that we want
to make in this submission, we want to provide you
with some important background information about,
to help you understand who we are
and where we are coming from.
MA is one of swi in.
We are located on the northernmost Peninsula of New Zealand.
The RO is predominantly rural
with four marai centered communities,
and a strong spiritual foundation reflected
through varied HA beliefs
and practices across the whanau have access
to a diverse mix of education pathways.
Two, early childhood education centers.
Four, three English medium primary schools,
which were established as native schools
before transitioning to the current primary school system.
One transitioning URA Iwi from an English medium primary
school and originally established as a native school.
One ura, one Maori home schooling provision a total
of 12 education settings.
This is the context from which our submission is made in the
basis on which the following points should be considered.
Our first point relates to the constitutional breach,
and that is the removal of TEI obligations.
The most alarming aspect of this bill from is the removal
of the requirement for school boards to give effect to tei.
This is a systemic erasure, as you have heard many of
receive education in English medium schools, and are
therefore vulnerable to the West, to the very western
centric direction that education is currently moving in.
By removing the expectation that school boards give effect
to te, the crown is dismantling the legal scaffolding
that protects the rights of to speak, practice Oura
and achieve as Maori in English medium school settings.
This was done without authentic consultation with ol.
The voices of the National Iwi Chairs forum
and education pig bodies were also completely ignored.
You are effectively asking boards
to dismiss the founding document
of this nation in the very place
where our future is shaped in the classroom.
The removal of obligation for boards
that this bill proposes, particularly insulting to ny
for ny, given that our 2.0 was signatories on both
guarantees, ma for authority over our tga,
our treasures, and this includes our
language and our customs.
Our chief signed those documents
because they envisage an where the language
and cultural practices
of our ancestors would be protected for generations.
This vision never transpired
because of colonial educational legislate legislation
that sought to eradicate our rights, our language,
and our practices.
The Education and Training Act 2020
recognized the intergenerational harm
that previous acts had caused, and the intention to protect
and strengthen TGI
and education by requiring school boards
to give effect is clear.
Removing this requirement is an enormous step backwards
and a vivid example of the recolonization of education.
I'm gonna pick up on our second point,
and this relates to the problem we have
with the centralization of authority,
particularly over cur curriculum because it compromises
and our ability to be self-determining with our communities.
This bill shifts power away from our n communities.
That is our iwis and the schools we work with.
It shifts that power into the hands of a single minister.
The new powers allow the minister to change the curriculum
and set professional standards
for teachers without mandatory consultation.
This is a contemporary affront to our,
that needs to be considered in relation to our history
and talked about the school makeup of our,
and she also talked about some colonial legislation
that I'm gonna act unpack further the education
or the Education Ordinance Act of 1847 was a tool
of insemination that enabled the government
to set strip western set requirements
that undermined Maori autonomy and cultural identity.
In 1867, the Native Schools Act,
and you've heard about the number of native schools in Alro
exacerbated assimilation by banning the use
of TE in schools, an attempt to both eliminate the language
and disrupt the con cultural continuity between the homes
of our ancestors and schools.
And it did so very effectively, which in turn, annihilated
tero across au We are still
trying to recover from this devastation today.
The government's exclusive control over the curriculum was
further reinforced in the Education Act of 1877.
The curriculum again excluded Maori knowledge
and culture focusing instead on European standards.
The curriculum for Maori was designed to prepare them
for low skilled manual rather than mental labor,
while the curriculum for Pakeha focused on the attainment
of academic standards.
With this backdrop,
I'm sure you can understand why our people are worried about
a minister of the government regaining exclusive control
over the curriculum.
The curriculum is the fundamental roadmap for teaching
and learning in our schools.
N all have spent decades building relationships,
building partnerships with local schools to ensure that our
and our identity are part of the curriculum.
This bill allows the minister in Wellington
to override those local relationships with that Western
centric one size fits all model,
which has failed us in the past,
and we have no reason to believe
that it will not fail us again in 2026 if this bill passes
our missed down on so much in their school education
because of colonial domination,
and they do not want our tamari learning about the histories
and cultural practices of ancient civilizations
and other lands, mostly located in the northern hemisphere.
That was their experience
of exclusive government control over the curriculum,
and they do not want that repeated.
Our elders want our tam to learn about the histories
and the successes
and the failures of their own una on their lands.
These stories, the heroes
and the heroines were invisible in the curriculum from 1847
and this bill here in 2026 could do that again.
We want our tamari to be learning about the brilliance they
descend from so that they can aspire
to replicate their brilliance, which is what our tu
who wanted for them.
Thank you very much both.
Unfortunately, we've reached the end of your time
for submission, so we do appreciate you making yourselves
available and for your submissions,
which we have obviously read, so do make sure know
that we have taken that on board.
So thank you for being with us.
We'll move on now to, uh, the PBTA
who we have in the room approach the table.
You, you know how this rolls Chris, so it's all over
to you now for the next 10 minutes.
And we also have Kate Gainsford with us.
Welcome Kate, and you're welcome to introduce yourself.
Sorry, Kathleen. Kathleen. Lovely.
Thank you very much. Uh, over to you.
Fantastic. Uh, Kota car.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
Chris CRO and I'm the PBDA President.
Um, I have with me Kate Gainsford, the immediate past chair
of the Secondary Principals Council,
and Kathleen Kaney, one of our advisor officer.
I speak here today on behalf of the PBDA du.
We represent a majority of secondary teachers in our
New Zealand, our members in ulu classroom teachers,
principals, technology educators,
and professionals who dedicate their lives to ensure
that every langata has access to high quality,
equitable education.
Our work is guided by three core objectives
to advance the cause of education for all learners to uphold
and maintain, maintain just claims of our members
and to affirm and advance really tgi,
these principles are not negotiable.
They're foundation of a strong democratic education system.
And today we are here because
that foundation is under threat.
I'll begin by expressing my absolute disappointment in the
way this government has treated the profession.
Previous governments on both sides
of the political spectrum have disagreed
with our nation's teachers over the years,
but they have never callously disregarded them the same way
this government has done PBDA dura strongly opposed
to the education training system reform amendment bill.
We can deem it as an undemocratic power grab
and an unprecedented politicization of education.
Teachers deserve to teach and students deserve
to learn in a system that is stable, reliable, and grounded
and evidence-based practice.
This bill does the opposite.
It destabilizes the system,
leaving it vulnerable to political whims.
It hands politicians, not education professionals
that are power to decide what Alang
learned and how they learn it.
This is not a technical change, it is a deep
and serious threat to the professional independence
and integrity of our curriculum.
Education is often a political football
and this only makes things worse,
rather than being a pathway for young people
to achieve their aspirations, let me be clear.
The way this bill has been
introduced, compounded the problems.
There was no warning, no meaningful consultation
with teachers, parents, students, or school boards.
The sector was asked to respond across Chriss
and New Year at a time when
schools are on their annual breaks.
It is unacceptable for legislation
with such far reaching consequences.
It was not just cynical, it was sneaky.
One of the most alarming aspects of the bill is proposal
to give the Ministry of Education the power
to set curriculum statements without consultation review.
Up to this point, curriculum development
has been a collaborative process.
It involves, uh, educators, communities, and city partners.
It has always been true that
what we teach reflects current research,
professional expertise, and local context.
This bill will replace that
with unilateral ministerial control.
Under these changes, schools lose the ability
to adapt curriculum to their communities.
He said they'll be forced to replicate prescriptive
statements dictated by the minister.
It is an overreach. It is unnecessary and it is dangerous.
The Ministry of Education is not required to be an educator.
Their advisors are not necessarily educators.
The fact then that this bill assumes
that political authority should override professional
knowledge is a recipe for instability
and poor educational outcomes.
We support regular curriculum reviews
and believe every five years is reasonable,
but giving the minister power
to make changes at will creates uncertainty throughout the
profession and a workload pressure
to bear on an already stretched workforce.
It undermines coherence
and makes it harder for schools
to communicate clearly with wana.
These changes also conflict with PBAs principles,
curriculum policy, and that TU must be visible.
Learners must be at the center and teachers must be valued.
Curriculum designers.
This bill reduces their role to mere compliance.
The bill also seeks to strip the teaching council
of its independence by moving key professional functions
to the Ministry of Education.
This includes teacher registration criteria,
qualification standards, practicing certificate
requirements, and the code of conduct.
This is unprecedented political control
over the teaching profession.
It allows the minister to use regulation as a tool
for government policy rather than professional standards.
This is not how you build trust or quality in education.
International evidence is clear systems
of strong professional boundaries.
Collaborative governments governance
achieve better outcomes.
Centralized political control does the opposite.
It erodes autonomy, reduces scrutiny
and risks, bureaucratic decision making.
We are also deeply concerned about the dilution
of the treaty commitments and cultural responsive practices
that are crucial for Maori learner's success.
The teaching council has embedded
to clearly obligations into the standards.
Moving these functions
to the ministry makes 'em vulnerable to political cycles.
Given recent moves through move
to treaty references from education legislation.
This is not a hypothetical risk.
It's a real and present danger.
This bill is also a step backwards from Maori education.
The centralizes power with the minister erodes Maori voice
and undermines the treaty based partnership essential
to education reform by removing decision
making from Maori communities.
In iwi, it places Maori medium
and Copa Maori pathways at serious risk pathways that exist
because mainstream systems have failed Maori
and they depend on langa and learning.
Grounded in Maori are much longer Maori.
Rather than advocating equity, this bill entrenches it, uh,
and by weakening Maori authority
and sidelining Maori lead solutions contrary to TOI
and accountability to Maori communities.
Finally, we are concerned that this bill opens the door
to further privatization through charter schools.
It introduces multi-school contracts enabling large sponsors
to operate chains of schools, a franchise model
that is potential to prioritize business outcomes
over student wellbeing.
This, despite the law being changed last year
to prevent us from initiating
multi-employer collective agreements.
This power imbalance has shifted too far from the people
who will be affected by this law.
We've seen this in the UK with similar reforms linked
to the AC ization and erosion of local control.
Large trust siphon money out
of the public system while imposing cookie cutter models
and stifle innovation and creativity.
The bill also creates a mechanism for schools
to revert from charter status back to state schools.
While we do not oppose this in principle,
the process clearly offers no protection
for staff at a time.
We have record numbers of teachers leaving
for international pastures.
Teachers are facing the loss of job security
and redundancy provisions that is unnecessary and unfair.
This bill is not about improving education,
it's about increasing political control.
It undermines professional independence,
arose democratic processes
and risks, turning our public sys education
system into the marketplace.
From personal experience, I know the power
of working together with iwi community
and educators to create meaningful educational pathways.
I was involved in the KU Maori history project in Southland,
a project that where schools
and iwi together the chance
to explore their shared history in Southland created a
powerful understanding of our students place in the world.
I urged slick the slick community to reject this bill.
Instead, let us work together government, educators,
communities and TUI partners to design reform reforms
that strengthen rather than weaken our system.
Our commitment is clear to uphold, to,
to perfect protect the, to protect professional autonomy
and to ensure that every longhi in our has access
to a high quality, equitable education.
Okay. Okay, uh, called Kate Gaines.
Um, I won't go through the introductions that, uh,
NZP pt uh, UA put in front of you.
Just dive straight in with your permission.
Um, I'm here today on behalf of the secondary principal, uh,
members of PPTA.
Uh, and secondary principles of
UA want to express their strong opposition
to aspects of the training
and amendment bill that I will outline, um, to follow.
Low educators
and education leaders are very disappointed
in the way they have been disregarded in the
drafting of the amendment.
And the missed opportunity there is to realize the potential
of young people and our public education system,
which goes hand in hand with a more inclusive approach.
An exclusive approach is unwise.
There is both optimism
and a huge possibility for potential
to be realized when policy makers, system leaders
and educators operate around a common point
of view about student learning and school improvement.
This is what we are seeking.
It's not achieved by rushed edicts
or by excluding genuine engagement with teacher
and principal representatives, specifically teacher
and principals unions.
The reality is that excellent schools need strong teacher
and principal organizations.
Poor relations between those organizations
and policy makers make it harder to recruit
and retain talented people.
What is required is a robust collaboration
and constant effort from all parties
to engage in genuine dialogue and consultation.
The select committee, of course, is part of that.
Uh, SPC expresses a strong opposition
to the government's decision to remove the requirement
for school boards to give effect to
TGI within the Education and Training Act.
SPC champions public education
and supports the growth of a culturally inclusive
and responsive secondary education system
that enhances Maori's success.
Schools must be places where a Maori
and the AU feel a sense of belonging and connection.
We support the important role
of the board in governing schools
and its role in ensuring that,
that the school gives effect to Tet.
We consider the absence of a specific provision
in the proposed amendment to be unacceptable
and a breach of the crown's obligations.
We have actually reached the end of our time
with you today.
Uh, unfortunately we have 10 minutes of a lot of time.
Well, we had 15 minutes. Uh, I have on the calendar.
Have you, have they been given 15?
Uh, that wasn't agreement. Okay. No, unfortunately. No, no.
We have got your submission.
Um, and so we do appreciate that you've been able
to make the time for us today.
Um, we, unfortunately, we've got a
very tight schedule and a lot of
Just make sure that it's in writing.
Is that additional information? Yes, I think so.
Would you like to table that? We are happy to receive the,
your, your notes as well, if you'd like.
Yes. Fantastic. Thank you very much. Thank you very much.
We now have, uh, Quentin Abraham online.
Quentin, hopefully you've accepted the panel request
and turn on your camera
Should be rejo.
Wonderful.
Oh, welcome Peter. So we've got your audio ready.
The time is yours. We have, uh, five minutes
with you this afternoon.
That includes time for questions
and do take your submission as read.
Thank you. Thank you.
Or the education work committee.
I'm an educational psychologist with 30 years experience,
and I work with a range of disadvantaged young people,
their schools and families.
I do not support the education training amendment bill
as it leaves the, the educational needs of our children
to the private concerns and whims of financial markets.
The World Bank finds
that the public-private partnerships such
as charter schools, have not translated
into reliable improvement in the quality of education.
Furthermore, the cost efficiencies are usually driven down
by lower teacher salaries that are unlikely
to be sustainable in the long term.
An independent evaluation of charter schools in now,
New Zealand was unable to conclude
that these were successful after three years.
Charter schools introduce privatizations
to our education system by having schools operated
by private sponsors.
Overall, they undermine our publicly funded systems.
The privatization of early childhood education in Altel
or New Zealand has some important warnings
for the expansion of charter schools.
For example, focusing on the outward signs of quality
that are easy to measure rather than the essential elements
that are difficult to measure, such as human relationships,
maintaining their share of profitable markets
by only serving higher paying families.
Evidence of reduced salaries, smaller staffing ratios
with higher staff turnover, more part-time workers
with less continuity of care.
Charter schools lack accountability, for example.
They're not required to follow the mandated curriculum.
The literacy and mathematics teaching in charter schools
tend to rely on prescribed packages
from private contractors.
This would limit the flexibility for teachers
to adapt the curriculum for students of differing abilities
and reduce the effective learning,
especially in schools using scripted approaches.
There needs to be more transparency in the funding
of private companies
and government procurement in the educ in the education
system to avoid allegations of corruption.
The curriculum of our children is too important to be left
to untrained people and ministers
of all political persuasions.
It needs to be transparent
and openly debated with evidence
that is carefully reviewed and evaluated.
This bill ignored the recommendations from the Ministry
of Education and the IHC to design fair
and inclusive system for all disabled students.
Those who are different disabled are likely
to acquire highly trained teachers with better teacher
to child ratios to provide the time and the quality to help.
This does not fit with those seeking
to make a profit in private systems.
There is no mention of protections
for including all students that are different
or have a disability within the new charter schools.
The bill references the requirement for tightening the,
the rules regarding exemptions.
There is no acknowledgement of the range of needs
or disabilities that might lead to student to avoid school.
There's been no meaningful consultation
with specialist support services who help disabled students
learn in educational settings.
For example, educational psychologists, speech
and language therapist vision or hearing experts.
A few weeks notice for consultation on this bill
during the Christmas period
is a cynical attack on the Democratic process.
It should be challenged by all political parties.
This bill has removed the requirement for boards
to give effect to TGI and
therefore Marginalizes Mar Maori and Tik Maori.
The citizens of RO New Zealand have delivered a mandate
to uphold our foundational document with 90%
of the 300,000 written submissions, opposing legislation
that would replace ity Maori perspectives
in decision making and curriculum developed need
to be upheld so we have an educational system fit
for all young people in our country.
In conclusion, I do not support education
and training amendment Bill.
Citizens of or New Zealand want an education system
that's fair and equitable for all young people.
This requires prioritizing funding for those
with greatest needs so they can learn.
This Bill fails to do this.
Please see the recommendations in my written submission
about Ways forward.
Thank you, Quentin. Is that the end of your submission?
It is. Submit committee. Did we have any questions?
I can't see a hand up. No. Thank you very much, Quentin.
Appreciate you making yourself available to us today.
Uh, next up line we have David Haynes.
We're good to go.
Welcome David. Thank you for joining us this afternoon.
Uh, we have five minutes for your submission today.
Please take your submission as read
and that five minutes does include time for questions
and we'll hand over that to you now.
Thank you. Koto. Koto, Koto.
Good afternoon. My name is David Haynes.
Thank you for hearing my oral, my oral submission.
I've been involved in the governance
of early childhood education for over nine years, and I
provided input on ECE matters
to this committee many times in the past.
I had no intention of commenting on this bill
as it does not contain anything that I wanted to comment on.
However, on the 15th of December,
you issued a press release stating
that you were seeking views on whether
to transfer regulatory functions for ECE from the Ministry
of Education to the Education Review Office.
In brief, I believe that trying to introduce this subject
into this bill at this late stage is in breach
of at least five of Parliament standing orders.
The timing immediately
before Christmas made it seem
that this was a cynical attempt to bypass proper process.
When I last provided an oral submission to this committee
on the 17th of September last year, I explained
to the anomalies between that Bill's contents
and the Associate Associate Minister's remarks.
Having heard and read my submission, this committee
took the conscious decision to ignore my explanation.
And you left the newly created director
of regulation within the Ministry of Education.
You should not transfer regulatory functions
for ECE from the ministry to eero.
No benefits of such a transfer have been identified.
This is not something recommended
by the recent regulatory review of ECE.
Most drivers of regulatory change identified in the review
lead to the conclusion that the solution would be
to remove the profit motive from ECE, not
to create a director of regulation.
I have become aware that some
of the weird process being followed
flows from a cabinet paper dated the 25th of July, 2025.
It is my opinion that this cabinet paper misquotes
and misrepresents the findings of the ECE regulatory review.
It tries to represent placing a director
of regulation in error as a simplification, one
of which we'll remove confusion and tension.
This is not the case.
I could go into considerable detail as to why I think
that the cabinet paper misrepresented the re
regulatory reviews findings.
I provided a 76 page submission to the regulator review.
I then provided the associate minister
with a 42 page analysis
of the review's final report highlighting its
errors and omissions.
I doubt that he read that analysis
or I would not be here today,
but there's no time to go into that.
The cabinet papers stated, need
for haste in implementing the R'S findings did not exist.
A circular argument was deployed by the associate minister.
There has to be haste in order
to reach meet an 18th of December deadline,
but there must be an 18th of December deadline
because there must be haste.
No haste is or was ever necessary.
2,320 submissions were received
by the Ministry for Regulation.
Those submissions resulted in the review report,
which did not recommend that a director
of regulation be established
and did not recommend
that regulatory functions be transferred to Arrow
for the cabinet paper to call up this feedback
to justify dispensing with public consultation was spurious.
It was very questionable process.
There was no justification to dispense
with public consultation.
Cabinet decisions based on this lack of public consultation
and on a misleading cabinet paper are
therefore deeply flawed.
This committee should recommend to cabinet
that the July paper
and all other cabinet papers relating to the establishment
of a director of regulation be reconsidered
and encourage them to receive informed
and impartial comment.
For the bill that you are now considering,
to create an additional director of regulation within Arrow
would cause duplication and confusion.
It would be contrary to the President's set
by the very recent EC Amendment Act.
It would be bad law.
This bill should be amended to place all directors
of regulation within the Ministry of Education.
This should apply to all further directors of regulation
that have yet to be pulled out of the magician's hat,
including for the regulation of primary
and secondary schools and all other parts
of the education system.
Kiara.
Thank you David. Uh, Lawrence, if it's very quick,
we have time for one question.
Okay. Um, Kira, David, thank you
so much for your submission.
Um, I wanted to check from a standing orders
perspective, um, this is sort of,
you've laid out the five standing orders
that potentially this same breach of i, I guess
withdrawing is one possibility.
But what are your thoughts going forward, for example,
that now a submission has been made?
How has it affected your ability
or other people you know's, ability to be able to analyze
something that, that no one currently knows
what the exact lines would look like in the bill
or as an amendment paper?
Uh, yes. The, there was short notice.
I mean, there are very few working days
between the 15th of December
and the, the deadline
for getting a submission in there was in the press release
no suggested legislative wording about
how this might be implemented or who might be doing what.
And, uh, we seem to be in a process where, uh,
the cabinet paper that, um, suggested to cabinet directors
of regulation should be established,
I believe was misleading.
Uh, and what we've got now is suggests successive, um,
proposals for various, uh, directors of regulations sort
of popping up one by one in an uncoordinated fashion.
And I think the best course of action
to arrive at some good law
and good regulation would be to reverse everything
that's been done with directors
of regulation and start again.
Thank you very much, David.
That's all the time we have for you this afternoon,
but we do appreciate you making yourself
available for the committee.
Yeah. We will move on now to
education Outdoors New Zealand,
who we have joining us online.
Fiona McDonald should be with us.
Fiona, just turn your camera on and your sound on
and then we will be able to meet with you.
Wonderful. Thank you. And we have got, uh, 10 minutes
with you this afternoon as an organization
that does include time for questions.
And do, uh, take your submission as read. Thank you.
Uh, called Fiona McDonald.
Um, I'm the Chief Executive
for Education Outdoors New Zealand, uh,
the National Subject Association Supporting Education
outside the classroom, EOTC and outdoor Education.
Across our, uh, we work with schools, URA boards,
outdoor providers and agencies
to strengthen our conga safety
and wellbeing uplift curriculum quality
and improve equitable access to learning in through
and about to tie, uh,
the natural environment across all learning areas.
And age is, uh, we are here
because the spill will shape, uh, how much voice sits, um,
with local community and school,
how professional judgment is treated and whether equity
and safety are strengthened.
And also how well we uphold to Treaty
of Wang obligations and practice.
Uh, we don't support the bill as it's currently drafted.
Um, from our perspective,
it shifts the system towards more central control,
less professional and community voice,
and a stronger compliance and intervention approach.
And that has real flow on effects for learning, like EOTC
and education where context, relationships
and professional decision making are essential.
Um, so I'll speak to six areas that we submitted on, uh,
and what we would, um, like the, um, to ask the committee
to do in those areas.
Uh, so firstly, attendance exemptions
and the loss of principal discretion.
So this bill moves, uh, decision making away from principal
and towards rules set by the secretary of education.
And those rules will change
or can change without clear definition in legislation
for EOTC and outdoor learning flexibility matters
because schools are responding to real lives
and real barriers, health transport complex needs
and whanau, um, circumstances.
And that happens best at a local level.
And our submission, we drew the committee's attention to
what the regulatory impact statement itself acknowledged.
Principles currently manage a broad range
of context related reasons for absence.
Mm-hmm. And there is particular risk of disadvantage
for Maori and Pacific learners
and Maori medium settings if that discretion is removed.
If we want better attendance,
the lever levers poor in connection,
not hide a central rules that remove local judgment.
So we are asking the committee
to keep principal discretion backed up
by clear guidance rather than by rigid centralized settings.
Secondly, uh, the curriculum statements
and the increased ministerial control.
We are deeply concerned about the changes, um,
that would make it easier for curriculum statements
to be amended without a robust process
that includes professional input
and consultation from an outdoor learning lens.
Curriculum quality relies on stability, coherence,
and the ability to reflect local place, local context,
and local relationships,
particularly including working closely with iwi and hapu.
We are worried that this change creates an easier pathway
for curriculum settings to shift
with political priorities rather than being anchored in
professional advice and evidence.
And we note that there hasn't been a regulatory impact
statement for this part.
So the risks and unintended
consequences aren't clearly tested.
So we are asking the committee to put
stronger safeguards back in a requirement for review
and professional advice and consultation
before curriculum statements are changed.
Thirdly, uh, the professional regulation
and the teaching council, we oppose the shift
of responsibility for setting professional standards
and registration settings away from the teaching council
into the hands of the Secretary of Education.
Shifting these professional settings
to the secretary moves the profession closer
to direct government control
and away from an independent profession led model.
We also think reducing elected voice weakens professional
legitimacy, and it's out of step with
how other professions are typically regulated.
For outdoor educators
and EOTC practitioners, trust, consistency,
and professional judgment are safety critical
and these changes work against that.
So we are asking the committee
to keep professional standards regulated within an
independent, professional led teaching council.
Fourth, the charter school expansion and system coherence.
We are concerned that this bill enables the growth
of charter school chains
and in an easier replacement pathway.
We highlight in our submission
that overseas experience shows that large
charter networks can reduce local accountability,
accountability and fragment consistent standards.
From an EOTC
and safety perspective, a parallel system
of chain charter schools can produce an,
an uneven application
of the EOTC safety management guidelines
and safety management plans,
creating variable safety practices
and equitable access to outdoor learning
and weaken connections to local iwi
and place-based curriculum relationships.
So we are asking the committee to pause any expansion
until proper consultation occurs.
And equity safety and coherence can be assured.
Fifth, the New Zealand School Properties Agency
and local decision making,
we are concerned about establishing a property agency
with strong powers to intervene, override boards,
recover costs, and enter and expect
because property decisions aren't just technical,
they affect everyday, uh,
learning conditions and local identity.
From our point of view,
property decisions show up in everyday learning
and safety for students, including access to outdoor areas,
storage and maintenance of safety critical equipment,
and whether environments support wellbeing in local context.
We also point out that the regulatory impact statement
doesn't demonstrate
that centralization improves educational outcomes
or resolves the core issue
of underinvestment in infrastructure.
The risks are practical here.
Uh, losing local insight into environment, climate
and iwi relationships reduced ability
to design culturally grounded and place responsive spaces
and increased compliance pressure on schools
where they're already stretched thin.
So we are asking the committee
to keep meaningful local involvement in property decisions
and focus on investment rather than adding a
new compliance layer.
Lastly, the overall shift towards compliance and escalation.
When oversight becomes primarily compliance driven,
schools often pull back from that high value learning,
like EOTC, not because it's unsafe, but
because it's seen as harder
to justify an appreciative environment.
And if the goal is better attendance
and engagement, then stagnations won't help us get there.
Relationships, contextual support
and trust are those drivers for improvement.
Uh, compliance heavy, heavy system tends
to narrow curriculum experiences
and disproportionately affects learners
who benefit most from that experiential
learning pathway into tia.
So we are asking the committee to prioritize wellbeing
and relational approaches over punitive compliance settings.
Uh, in closing, we are asking the committee to recognize
that these changes taken together, shift power upwards,
reduce local and professional voice,
and increase risk for equity, safety
and curriculum breath with consequences
for outdoor education and EOTC where local context, place,
and professional judgment are essential.
So we're asking the committee
to not progress the bill in its current form.
Remove and amend
or amend provisions that centralized decision making
and weaken professional autonomy.
Reinstate meaningful consultation requirements require full
regulatory impact statements where they're currently absent,
absent and rean reforms and obligations, trust
and evidence informed practice.
Nu
Thank you Fiona.
We have one question in the room. We do have two online.
Uh, we'll see how we go. But first question is Kyle Bates.
Uh, thanks Joan, and thanks for your submission.
Um, in your submission, I think,
and in what you spoke to, you spoke about, uh, the challenge
with property being a product under investment.
Mm. I I just wanna understand
how much you factor into your consideration of
property improvement
and challenges, um, in education is the fact
that money has been wasted by the Ministry of Education
and the cost per bill, for example,
of classrooms halving since national
came, uh, into government.
So I think there's a balance there, obviously.
Um, and we don't wanna see wasted, uh, money.
But what we do want to see is locally led decisions that,
uh, take into account, uh, local circumstances,
environments, um, iwi,
and really, uh, make sure that builds, uh,
while cost effective also, uh, the right, um, build
for that place and allow the best educational outcomes for
that place and the, the people that then work in that, um,
particular building.
Thank you. And then the next hand up was Lawrence. Nan,
Uh, thank you chair and thank you Fiona.
Uh, my questions around the fact that you mentioned
that there is, uh, the, the allowance for minister to make
to exercise the power around curriculum, noting
that there's been some, uh, issues with education outdoor,
um, New Zealand not being consulted as part
of moving the curriculum from general into vocational.
What sort of assurances would subject association have for
that and that the subject associations would be properly
and consulted
or even co-create a curriculum, uh, without
diminished centralizing some of that ability and function?
I think, um, that's where we see a huge risk
because we've, we've seen a little hint of it, um, lately,
um, with the changes, um,
happening without our genuine input.
Um, and as the subject associations re uh,
representing our different areas of curriculum
and expertise with years
and years of experience within each association, uh,
it's absolutely critical that it's captured in regulation
that key professionals
and organizations like our own are consulted
with any of those changes.
Um, and yeah, what we've seen lately is one
of the reasons why we are so concerned about this area, um,
in this legislation.
Uh, thank you. We have now run out of time with you today,
Fiona, but we do appreciate you
making yourself available for us.
Uh, thank you very much. We'll now move
on to the Office of Early Childhood Education,
who I believe we have in person, Dr. Sarah Alexander.
Wonderful. Thank you.
Um, we have got 10 minutes with you today. Okay.
That does include time for questions. Yep.
And we do read your submission, so take that as read.
Um, but feel free to introduce
information that you'd like to.
Okay. And we'll hand it over to you. Thank you.
Oh, that's brilliant. Uh, thank you Katie.
And, uh, hello everyone.
Yes. We have got a mixed, uh, committee.
We've got some online and some in person.
Yes. Well, it's, it's lovely to speak with you.
Um, and thank you for your time today.
Um, I know, you know, I've come in from the sunshine.
I know you're probably dying to get out the sunshine
'cause it's beautiful out there.
Um, you know, and Wellington on a good day. Yeah.
And David Haynes, I believe has already spoken with you
and, uh, he's already brought a bit of that sunshine
to discussion, uh, to the discussion on the transfer
of ECE regulatory functions
to the newly created director role.
And the movie, uh, created director role, uh, into Arrow.
And that's exactly what we need.
We need light clarity and a clear view of the issues
and what this plan actually represents.
I say plan rather than proposal
because it's being presented politically, uh, as something
that's already been decided.
Um, it's presented as something that's inevitable
that it's going to happen.
And I hear from both ERO
and the Ministry of Education
that they're visibly working on making it happen.
Um, ministers Seymour's announcement in July
of last year came out of nowhere.
It was a shock. Whose idea was this?
That, uh, regulatory functions would be transferred, uh,
from the ministry to ero?
Um, do you know, I've read the cabinet paper
and, um, you know, it suggested
that it came from the Ministry for Regulation.
But you go to the Ministry for Regulations Report,
and I look at the list of recommendations in there.
It's not recommended. I also, uh, reviewed
what the Ministry for Regulations said about eero.
And, uh, there were a number of things, points
that the Ministry for Reg Regulations seem
to misunderstand about what Euro does and who it reviews
and how many people it reviews,
and how often it reviews eecs.
So, you know, it, uh,
doesn't really reflect a good understanding on the part of,
of the Ministry for Regulation, either in terms of, of s So,
you know, I wonder about the quality of advice
that's been given, uh, to people in cabinet.
Um, and, um, you know, it was interesting, uh, to listen
to the presenter from the ECC, uh,
the Early Childhood Council, uh,
to this committee the other week.
He strongly supported the transfer.
Yet from what he said, if you listen to what he said,
it sounded like many of the service operators, uh,
he represents, don't share that view.
There are indeed significant implementation issues.
The feedback at the Office VCE that we've received,
including from ECC members
and others, um, tells us
that it's not in anyone's best interests.
And it only leads to one conclusion that the best protection
for children's safety
and the quality of ECE is to keep Eero
as an independent reporting agency
and the Ministry of Education as the regulator.
So, going back in time to July of last year,
the press release that was issued, uh,
read the government will shift licensing and certification
and enforcement responsibilities from the Ministry
of Education to the Education Review Office,
that it will do it from next year.
Presumably that's from 2026 from next year.
ECE providers will only have to deal as if it's a burden.
We'll only have to deal with one regulator.
Well, uh, my initial reaction,
a reporter phoned me like probably within minutes
of the release of, of this.
Um, and my initial reaction was, um, well, you know,
perhaps this is a good thing.
Um, you know, because of, you know, stuff
that's been happening within the Ministry of Education,
you know, maybe this is a good thing to,
to this transfer to happen.
Um, because aero understands quality assurance,
and that's only gotta be good
that it understands quality assurance
and aero genuinely keeps children at the center of its work.
Um, and, and it,
and it doesn't suffer like the Ministry of Education does,
um, with, you know, market driven lobbying pressures.
So it, it maintains its independence quite well.
Uh, so, you know, my initial reaction
to the report is question without having time
to think about it was, Hey, maybe it's a good thing.
But once our office actually started, uh, digging into this,
um, it became clear that the move does not stack up.
Um, first there was no meaningful con consultation.
Uh, people across the sector have told our office
that they hadn't been given enough information, enough time,
or enough clarity up to understand why and what's happening.
Many described the process as rushed, opaque,
and believe that this government is doing it by stealth.
That's unfortunate. Um, which only then adds to the stress
and the instability that the sector is already facing.
And it's already been imposed on it in the last year or two.
Um, now I, I raised
before in the, that press release does two does from next
year, that this starts from next year mean the start
of 2026,
because of that press statement.
And from the start from 2026, we all expected to see
that this would be in the ECE reform bill.
Um, but amendment bill, ECE reform amendment bill.
But it wasn't, yeah.
That, that has now been passed
and it wasn't in there that the transfer would happen.
And it's not in the current.
So, you know, it's not in the current, um, bill
before you in the current, um,
education training system reform amendment bill either.
Why not? This is now, it's made back in July.
You know, why isn't it in the current bill?
And I'd like to ask for you to tell me,
but I'm guessing you won't.
Um, but, you know, I just want to raise it anyway.
Um, and put that question out there. Why not?
Because it, in terms of democracy
and in terms of proper processes, it just doesn't sit easy.
It doesn't feel right.
Um, there were, um, and
because the deadline, it was announced just
before Christmas that, um,
that you would be considering the transfer as part
of this amendment bill current before you.
And the deadline was put at, at 14th of January.
Now, I know, for example, the Ministry
of Education shuts down
to something like the 15th of January when it wants to do,
um, official Information Act requests.
So if you put out a request just
before Christmas, how do you expect the public
to have enough time when even the government ministry
departments don't have those working days available?
So very few working days for people to notice and,
and to even notice that press release and to respond to it.
Um, there was no draft legislative wording for us to be able
to scrutinize and actually be able to give you any comment.
Um, no details. There were no costings.
What is this gonna cost? I thought under Nicola Willis
that this government was all about saving some money.
Um, this seems to be another way of spending money, um,
because there's no real justification for it,
and it's going to cause a lot of upheaval.
Um, second, as I mentioned right at start, um,
there's been a real question about how well informed you
as mps and also the cabinet ministers, um,
uh, have, have actually been about this,
how well informed you've been because who believes
or has ever been, um, who believes that Eero is
or ever has been the regulator for ECE?
Will the transfer mean ECE operators will have to deal
with only one regulator?
Well, Eero isn't a regulator yet.
The very reason for this is to create any one regulator,
but Arrow is not even a regulator.
Um, the MOE is the regulator.
This is a legislation for a reason.
It licenses services, investigates complaints
and forces compliance,
and connects all that, uh, with policy
funding and curriculum.
And that joined up view matters.
Um, arrow's role is completely different.
Um, they're the independent evaluators,
the quality assurance experts, if you call it.
Um, and their credibility for parents
and for the public comes from not being the enforcer.
And, uh, I know time's running out.
So what about the practical realities?
Um, people trust the independence of Arrow
and Arrows reports, and that will no longer be the case.
Um, arrows going to have all
of its resources pulled towards regulation and compliance.
Um, it's not gonna take long
before the work that Eero does best,
which is quality assurance
and supporting the unique character
and strengths of individual services diminishes.
Um, there's also another big issue, uh, of, of the risk
of losing experienced Ministry of Education staff.
So it depends if, if, if this transfer happens
with current e staff
or if ministry staff are asked to reapply
or are just shifted or transferred into ERA offices,
there's fewer aero offices,
there's more local regional ministry offices.
So you've got accommodation issues to begin with.
Then you've got the, the issues that, that the staff
that are recruited for aero are quite different to the staff
that are recruited, recruited for the Ministry of Education.
So staff that work in the Ministry of Education tend to have
in, in the area of ECE licensing
and compliance, they tend to have ECE experience.
That's not the case in aero.
The ones that work in the Ministry of Education,
um, may be younger.
They may have young children.
They may not be available to travel widely,
like the aero staff are expected to travel
and to be free to do that travel.
So, you know, if, if it is a case that it's just seemed
to be that the ministry staff will just move into the era,
I think we're gonna lose some valuable talent
and people just won't be able to make that move
because they got their jobs in the ministry for a reason.
They had that easy expert expertise,
and they want to get to know
and have those relationships on the ground
with early childhood services.
Um, also is not an organization ready
to take up major new regulatory powers.
It's not gonna speed anything up
because speed comes from capacity and systems
and not swapping agencies.
ERA itself, as you know, is under pressure.
They've just restructured. They've lost ECE positions.
They don't even have a permanent chief executive right now.
In the 2025 public service census found that 66%
of aero staff felt staffing levels
and workloads pressures prevented them
from performing at their best.
Is that what we want to do now?
Load them with more work that they, they're suffering one
of the highest rates in the public, um, sector,
and we want to give them more work.
But actually from an ECE perspective, um,
the biggest issue just to finally is that this
represents a giant step backward, this change.
And I don't want this government to go down in history
as making this big giant step backwards.
This change will reverse progress made since the 1980s when
childcare services were brought into the education system.
It also breaks the connection between regulation,
policy funding,
and curriculum that are all held together within the,
under the Ministry of Education.
And, uh, that alignment that coming together is the backbone
of a coherent education system.
It's taken decades to build that.
And that what's being proposed is a,
or the plan is, is a major structural change.
And if
or when it happens, um, it's just gonna pull that apart.
Um, and that would be very sad
and disappointing to see that fragmentation occurring.
Um, so that's my bit.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you for making yourself available.
We have no time for questions, um,
but do appreciate your submission. Thank
You. Thank you.
We'll move on now to Carina nata, who we have on Zoom.
You joining now? Wonderful. Good afternoon, Carina.
I, I believe you might need
to move your camera cover. There we go.
Fabulous. Thank you. Wonderful.
We have, uh, five minutes with you, Carina.
If you want to, uh, take that time as you wish,
does include time for questions
and do consider your submission as read.
Thank you very much for the time.
Excuse me for a moment, darling.
You can play on mum's phone. Thank you sweetheart. Mm-hmm.
I have my, the timing was always gonna be a little bit,
bit problematic with the end of, so, um, just a big mahi
to this, um, to the committee
for providing this opportunity.
I am taking my submission as read.
Um, there are a couple of points that I'd like to emphasize.
Um, and then I'm hoping to, um, you know,
if there's any questions that you'd like to ask.
I'm hoping to have plenty of time for that as well.
Um, so I, um, I am a,
at secondary schools,
I have a master's in contemporary education.
Um, and 16 years of experience in both, um,
teaching in the classroom and leadership
and in governance, educational governance.
Um, and I'm coming to you also as a mama.
So my son is in year nine this year,
and my daughter, um, is in unit at local primary school.
Um, and I'm very, very concerned about what this bill
and, uh, the changes that it proposes, what it means
for them and their education.
Um, in my written submission, I spoke of
how the proposed concentration of power with the minister,
um, undermines our professional autonomy
as teachers literally deprofessionalizing our profession.
So this increased bureaucratic oversight rolls out in
practice as the imposition of standardized curricula, um,
scripted Eurocentric, um, curricula standardized testing,
the use of algorithms to guide decisions
that previously have been made, um, like by iwi
and hapu partners, expert educators, students,
and other community, uh, stakeholders collaborating
with those of us on the ground a lot,
who work alongside them to, uh, create responsive
and, um, you know, effective, uh, curriculum.
So I spoke about how this approach, uh,
the centralized approach politicizes
and has that potential to politicize core aspects
of teaching and learning according to the priorities
of the government of the day, rather than the needs
of learners and communities.
I want to emphasize the point that this has the potential
to destabilize the sector in a way
that we've never experienced
before, really undermining meaningful progress towards a
just education that works for everybody.
It'll foster a consistency in academic pathways
and produce a lack of coherence and qualifications.
It is not in the best interest of our students,
our au our diverse communities and our country.
It's also incredibly undemocratic.
Like I recall the, um, the process
that we undertook when updating the 2007 curriculum.
Um, back in 2017, the children's commissioner, along
with the School Trustees association
had about 1600 odd submissions when they surveyed
Tamari about their real lived experiences.
Because those two organizations were determined
that we set national education learning priorities
that reflected lived experiences.
And we also engaged in the,
which was extensive consultation,
over 50,000 pieces of engagement.
We used to inform the national learning
education learning priorities.
And that document was summarily dismissed by this ministry
as they, that, you know, the process of, um,
that this bill proposes that the minister
and the ministry itself can rewrite curriculum statements,
um, autonomously.
That they can not only, um,
not only rewrite curriculum statements
and tell us what to teach,
but also how to teach it with the removal
of the standard setting from the teaching council
and being placed with the ministry.
So, you know, I mean, this diminishes the, um, the sector.
It diminishes us as professionals.
It diminishes the relationships that we've worked very hard
to establish with our, so
that we can deliver education in a way that is
to TDT honoring.
And I, I just wanted to, to talk about how, what it means
to be to TDT honoring.
I mean, it is a document that was signed at hapu level.
They were the polity at the time.
And so it is very much a regional, locally based, um,
you know, requirement for schools to engage in meaningful
partnership with Hapu and Iwi.
And that is what has been taking place in earnest over
the last few years.
And so, you know, this bill puts all of that at risk
and it's inconsistent with the clear, uh, demand
from the sector, which is evident both in the number
of school boards who have, um, shown the ongoing commitment
to TDT as well as to the, um,
fairly recently feedback that the teacher council received
on their proposal to change our standards to have
to TDT partnerships central to all that we do.
Um, and so I really fear for the
tension between what the sector knows is required to build
and develop an inclusive education system that is truly
to TDT honoring, um, the gains that we have made
and, uh, and what this bill is requiring, uh,
or what the bill will mean for, um,
for education in the future.
So, uh, that really is the, those really are the key points
that I wanted to emphasize.
And I'm open to any questions
that the panel may, um, may wish to
Ask.
Thank you, Karina. We've actually gone over time with you,
so we do appreciate you making yourself available.
It does happen frequently, don't you worry.
Thank you again for making yourself
available for us this afternoon.
We appreciate your, um, participation in this process.
We'll move on now to Vivian Anderson,
who I believe is online and Well done.
There we go. Beautiful. Thank you.
I hope you can see me all right. We can Koto.
Um, thank you for the opportunity to speak,
and I'd like to, to the words
of Karina in the previous, um, submission.
So, um, this bill will weaken,
not strengthen our education system, undermine the status
of the teaching profession,
and increase system vulnerability
to short term political swings.
Now I take my, um, submission as read.
I'm the Dean of Education at the University of Otago,
and I'm speaking with that hat on today.
I'm also a mama and an ex primary school teacher,
and hopefully a grandmother to be one day.
So I want to speak specifically to the parts
of the bill relating to the functions
and makeup of the teaching council, particularly in relation
to initial teacher education or ITE.
Um, the proposed changes
concern me for the following reasons.
First, they're not grounded in quality evidence. Yes.
Second, they will increase the system's vulnerability
to ministerial whim
and the influence of unelected interest groups.
And thirdly, they undermine the professional
status of teachers.
So, in regard to my first concern,
the regulatory impact statement
regarding ITE standard settings provides weak evidence
for the proposed changes the evidence cited includes
variability in children's achievement.
We actually know that variability is very closely, uh,
linked to increased social inequity, uh, the opinions
of unnamed stakeholders.
A study that raised concerns about the mathematical
confidence of people entering initial teacher education
and a 2024 arrow report based on a small self-selected
sample of initial teacher education graduates
and a smaller sample of their
principals and mentor teachers.
So much of the cited evidence is of extremely low quality,
and none of the data cited provide causal, uh, evidence
that ITE is failing.
In relation to my second concern, I'm suspicious
that evidence is being used here
to justify increased ministerial control to an extent
that risks undermining the integrity
of our public education system.
And I'm gonna provide some background to the statement.
So bear with me. In April, 2024, soon
after the current minister came to government,
the news media began reporting her claims
regarding the woeful state of initial teacher education.
Those of us in the university sector who produced about 90%
of New Zealand's teachers were completely blindsided.
Our staff were heavily involved at the time in supporting
the ministry's work program as educational researchers,
curriculum writers, and subject matter experts.
And shortly after the ERA report Ready, set,
TEACH came to light.
The Deans of Education
as a collective insisted on the opportunity
to review this report prior to release,
and I drew the short straw.
So I reviewed that report, minus the methodology.
It had been removed. It was clear from the findings
and recommendations in the report
that EERO were cherry picking evidence
to feed a narrative of it TE failure.
And once the report was released,
it was also very clear why they did not want the
methodology peer reviewed.
It was so appalling.
Notably, the report's recommendations also were bore a very
striking resemblance to an opinion piece written the year
prior by Michael Johnston
and Stephanie Martin for the New Zealand initiative,
entitled Who Teaches the Teachers.
And this included arguments for privatized models of ITE,
which the ERA report also, um, uh, recommended.
Michael Johnston had of course, uh, been appointed
by the minister to chair her ministerial advisory group.
Then during 2024, university based education specialists,
um, were progressively dropped
from curriculum writing groups.
And last year, the one elected ITE representative
was removed from the governing board
of the teaching council.
The minister appointed as chair of the teaching council,
the CEO of A recently created private IT provider.
That's the first time an IT head has ever been appointed
chair of the governing board.
So major conflict of interest
and communications between the two have received some
scrutiny in the media already.
So, enshrining in law, the removal
of an elected ITE representative from the teaching council
is bizarre and targeted, given the critical role
of ITE in producing the teaching workforce
and in universities producing evidence
to guide system level improvement, reducing the council
and stacking it mainly with ministerial appointments, reads
as a, a blatant attempt to control the sector.
It will support ministerial overreach
and risk undermining confidence in public education.
And finally, shifting the teaching council's standard
setting and registration front functions to the Secretary
of education is unprecedented.
It undermines the professionalism of teachers professions,
set standards for and regulate professions, not governments
or their appointed public servants.
So I read this bill as intended
to enforce compliance on New Zealand's teachers
and ITE providers.
And, uh, these proposed changes will not
strengthen our education system.
They will fundamentally undermine it.
They will increase its vulnerability to the influence
of private interests, which we are already seeing,
and the vagaries of political whim.
And it must not proceed in its current form.
It's a dangerous, dangerous bill.
And I've only spoken about part of it, so if there's time
for questions, I can see that Lawrence has his hand up.
Uh, yes, we do have time for one question.
I think at this stage we'll see
how Lawrence's question goes.
Cool. Uh, thank, thank you, chair.
Thank you so much for that submission, Vivian,
and your written submission as well.
Just in terms in terms of it, uh, it DE
and the teaching council, there are obviously people are
saying that the teachers are not
prepared at this current stage.
What are the alternative then?
Because obviously the, the perception of
what this bill is going, like you said, is um, going
to be more centralized and more controlled.
So what is the, what's the alternative to ensure that
with good quality teachers coming through, um, its,
So firstly, correlation does not equal causation.
So issues in an education system doesn't mean you can
draw a line to ITE.
Um, the, the, all of the data about teacher's preparedness,
um, raises big questions at a system level.
And we've really encouraged the ministry
to talk with us about that.
And, and to be fair, ministry staff have done that.
So there are some big system things that I don't have time
to talk about, but correlation is not causation.
No researcher worth their salt will claim causation from
some related statistic.
Secondly, there are, there are education systems
that are really strong.
And what, um, and I'll give an example of Finland,
where they have a, um, high trust model
where all teachers must have a master's level qualification,
where higher education providers are seen
as in indispensable to the quality of education system.
And where objectives and measures
for teacher education are developed in consultation
with education providers.
And then they have an agency which is at arm's length,
works in collaboration with the ministry.
But no minister
or secretary of education can single-handedly introduce
change or define what counts as valid evidence.
Many simply don't have the expertise.
Willow, have we got time for one more?
Uh, we could just, if it's very succinct, Willow Jane,
we could have a question from you,
Hilda. Thank you, Vivian,
for your very clear submission.
I just want to ask what your, uh, experience
of consultation has been and what your expectation would be.
Yeah, so my expectation was that we would be, that
as deans of education, we would have a direct line
to the minister that when we asked to meet
with her, she would meet with us.
Um, we now have a track record of refusal to meet,
and so she's meeting with many people, but not with us.
Um, there is a tone of denigration of our sector.
Um, there's a tone of mistrust.
Uh, there's a tone of blame we've been preached at about
qualities of evidence.
Uh, we are education scholars internationally published.
Our work is internationally peer reviewed.
It's, it's, um, appalling actually, and quite shocking.
So yeah, we are very,
very worried about the way things are going
and what this bill suggests will happen moving forward.
Thank you, Vivian. That's all the time we have for you.
Thank you today. Appreciate
your participation in this process.
Um, our next submitter has, uh, canceled
and we now have Craig Atkinson.
Wonderful. I just by zoom. Wonderful. There we go.
Just gonna invite him up to the table. That wouldn't work.
Craig, hopefully you've accepted your invitation
to be a panelist.
You could turn your camera on and your microphone.
Wonderful. Good afternoon, Craig.
We have five minutes with you today,
and that includes time for questions.
You can take your submission as read.
And that's over to you now.
Thank you. I have sent, uh, uh, uh, several more,
uh, parts to a submission through today.
There was actually seven parts, but it's only Word document.
If you could please accept them.
I've spent an awful lot of time, uh, documenting in it
through, uh,
and I speak about my experience as somebody who was filled
by education that will, for 10 years of my, of my life,
through early education, I were traumatized that it affects
and lives me with mental health throughout my life.
Uh, and it wasn't until 13-year-old
where I made a small wooden face
and was identified the tools then
that I was then put into alternate
programs, which they removed.
So in England, they remove English.
So it's 85 to a hundred percent practical learning,
and that is the basis for equal opportunities,
education and that.
So I was taken out with 20, 25 other students out
of a hundred, uh, students within the year
until we were gonna prison, we were gonna be on benefit.
But the rest of his life, uh, they didn't know
what they could do with us.
An education had failed us, uh, at, at, at the end
of going on the course, we got to choose what trade we went
to at an early stage,
and then we got to pick the correct trades
that we could follow through where there was no, no English.
I'm severely dyslexic.
So dyslexia, you have no phonics
or pronunciation, and it don't matter.
You can teach. I'm recognized as a dyslexic coach
by keto cowling from to, to, to, uh,
but you, you, it's like blindness or deafness.
There's different levels of it,
and you may have no phonics whatsoever.
So pronunciation of words is very difficult.
Now, when it's connected with a DHD,
there is a major problem to literature.
Words move around and you can't connect.
I used to write backwards
and until our 40-year-old words would move around.
So it was impossible to read
or to learn by learning from, from
that method of education.
If I'd have been in New Zealand, I would not be a carpenter
or a joiner in under your training
because I could not do the academic work.
Well, I've been in New Zealand,
I've been your elected Auckland President
for the Certified Builders number four
for your earthquake commission.
I've, uh, been on your national review of carpentry.
I volunteered for five years, uh, one who hung a high school
that works with children like myself
that have a wonderful program.
But there's limitations by how the ITO and how the education
and N-C-T-U-A relate to what
is is acceptable.
On the National review of carpentry, uh, Kelston Boys School
attended and for a program for children that were failed,
that were mainly Maori and Pacific,
and your own disabilities were a hammer, they had
to draw a picture of a hammer, write half a page in English,
and draw a board around the page.
At no point did they pick a hammer up
or use a hammer that the, uh, one of the students reported
that when he was asked how wonderful the services was, uh,
at, at unitech, that, uh,
what you're on about four white walls and a blackboard.
And, and that was the resources
that was given to these students.
So I, I, I did a presentation while I was doing, uh,
research for Scion while I was doing a master's degree.
Uh, I couldn't, uh, it, it was down in Wellington, uh,
actually at the Green Party conference.
And I couldn't write the words,
but I could draw a picture of a pyramid,
and it showed one side that you went up steps
that you could get to a master's degree, uh, and a PhD.
And on the other side, it was just failed.
There was no avenues.
And it, it, it was my own experience that's taught me then
that because they removed that present of academic English
and that I was able to prosper.
So you have to work on a student
strengths, not the weaknesses.
That that is a complete fulfillment when we just work on a,
a student's, uh, failures and English understanding, uh,
and that, so an education system,
and I've listened to the teachers before
and there's a lot to be changed into education.
So it's fair and equal for all children, not just
for his chosen ones that can speak one language
and do academically work wonderful.
That doesn't make wonderful carpenters, wonderful nurses,
wonderful mechanics.
We need a structure, and we don't need this
through different schools.
We need this inner school
and that we need to start working younger with people
and practical hands on.
We need to have resources that set out what the, the,
the understandable formats.
I found a book when I were in my thirties by Wilson,
and I could understand the entire book
and read it within an hour at the time in my life here.
Took me a year to read a simple book.
So we have to change education,
but we have to listen to people that have gone
through the struggles and come out the other end.
And if you don't do that, you're just gonna carry on
with the same problems,
the same mistakes over and over again.
20 years ago since the Dyslexia Foundation
ask its members to, to come
and speak to its local mps, I'm still going,
you've changed nothing so far.
So we won't change people with disabilities.
Look at your prison statistics.
Look at what your suicide numbers are
and your construction and that.
And it's from how you educate, how you support your people.
There is no follow through from education
to young people.
I was five, 6-year-old when I was taking into a building
site after they diagnosed me with dyslexia, sat me on a pile
of blocks and told me to keep my mouth shut.
Watch and listen. And that were my education
for next 10 years.
That I go every weekend and every school all of day
because school fails me.
And it just affected me in such a way that it, it books
with you if you, if you can't read words
and it's moving about how can you concentrate
and learn, you can't.
So I think it's time that that parliament
and the member of Ministry
of Education took the tin glasses off
and got down to the fundamentals,
what the problems are to this contract.
And it all starts with education where it's failed.
Thank you very much, Craig.
We do appreciate your participation in this process.
Thank you for making the time for us today.
Can I ask, will you accept my, uh,
seven submissions I've sent through
that I've been working on my whole, I've,
I've made eye contact with our secretariat
and we are gonna follow up on that.
We haven't received that as a committee, um,
but they will check whether they've got it.
If not, they'll get in touch with you
and then we'll, uh, be able to table it.
We have no reason why we wouldn't accept it,
so thanks for raising that with us. Craig,
Thank you over so much.
Thank you for your time today. Thank you.
Uh, move on now to Rebecca Les,
uh, who is in the room with us.
Wonderful, Rebecca. Hopefully you've, um,
been in long enough to know the drill
and we've got, uh, five minutes with you
and that time is yours now.
Thank you.
While I believe some change is good,
particularly when those who will ultimately be impacted
by the change are a large part of that change,
particularly in this case, educators, tamari
Wau in their communities.
This has by and large not been the case.
The un uh, the unpredictable changes to the curriculum
that this government have made in two years are the most
aggressive that I have seen in the last 45 years.
I've been an educator for 45 years.
I've been a teacher, I've been a school principal.
Uh, and this, these changes are the most aggressive,
genuine consultation with communities.
Au Tam specifically has been lacking,
and I believe the audacity of this government
to incorrectly believe
that schools are not crown entities or agencies.
So therefore, they can remove the obligation, uh,
of school boards to give effect to the treaty,
I believe is a racist move education
and its institutions with a vehicle that we use
to assimilate Maori and to almost annihilate El Maori.
And to make second class citizens, particularly, uh,
under the Native Schools Act of Maori education,
then should be the pathway
that can restore all that was taken.
Giving the power to set curriculum statements
to the minister is politicizing education, and
therefore leaving education
to become our political football.
Neither our children, their families, communities,
and educators deserve to be blown by every wind
of political doctrine.
And this power risks our unique curriculum being outsourced
to private corporations.
I've served as a governing council member on the Teaching
council for nine years, the deputy chair for the last three
of those years before taking up my current role
as the Manura president of n Iua.
It is the only professional body for te
for the teaching profession.
The code
and the standards, uh, are a co-designed set of standards
by the profession for the profession over a number of years.
In my early time as a governing council member on the,
on the teaching council, they had Hui from the top
of the north island to the bottom of the south island,
engaging with both Maori, non Maori teachers, principals,
uh, students, uh, to co-design the standards
to co-design the code.
It is an, it is absolutely appropriate that the code
and the standards remain with the professional body
that is responsible for monitoring the code
and the standards, and that's the teaching council.
This move away from the teaching council will definitely
undermine the genuine autonomy that the profession has
to moderate and take responsibility for the profession.
Moreover, decreasing the opportunity for the profession
to have a voice at the governing table
by decreasing representation,
I believe will also decrease genuine engagement,
consultation and participation.
This move on the, on the government's part,
I believe is an absolute takeover of the, of the education
of education particularly, uh, particularly
with the teaching council.
So I can reiterate that I believe
that this bill is detrimental to educators
and more so for Tamana and the communities.
Kiana,
Thank you very much.
Uh, Rebecca, thank you for making yourself
available first this afternoon.
We've got one question from, uh,
barn sunan on the screen for you.
Uh, Kiona. Thank you so much.
Chi uh, Kiona, thank you so much for your submission.
I guess one of the, the main thing
that we've been hearing from a lot of submitters is
around the genuine engagement with the sector
and kind of co-creating various things,
whether it's teaching counselor it t or curriculum
or attendance, et cetera.
Um, what in your experience has been the broader engagement
with Maori educators?
Uh, and what then other risks
that this building presents in addition to
the actual personal experience
that people have gone through?
Um, well, I can, I can categorically tell you
that at the disestablishment of the resource teachers
of Maori and the resource teachers in literacy, Maori, uh,
educators could, uh, could Kapa
and Kui were not genuinely engaged or consulted.
They were not. Uh, so, you know, to,
in terms of consultation, uh, Maori
definitely have mechanisms within their
organizations to consult.
It's difficult to consult if you're not being asked
to consult, but you've been told this is what it might be.
This is, you know, this is what we are thinking of doing,
or this is, uh, this is how it's going to be
not, not genuine, uh, consultation.
Uh, Lauren,
Thank you very much. Thank
you very much for making yourself available for that
for us this afternoon.
I do appreciate it. And we next have Bruce Nichol,
uh, who is on Zoom, I believe.
Wonderful.
I'll be back.
Hear me now? Yes, Bruce, we can. Thank you.
We have five minutes with you this afternoon.
Thank you. Um, And that time does include time
for questions, so we'll hand it over to you now.
Thank you very much. You'll see in my written submission
that I'm a developmental psychologist.
Um, that is something which is a bit rare in this country.
We come from the education sector and we look at the breadth
and depth of what it is to be a human being.
Uh, as a registered psychologist,
the depth work came from my choosing
to be a, a, a union dream analyst
and also concurrently to be a holo holotropic breath work,
uh, facilitator through Stan gr.
So that gives you some idea of my depth coming back
to development, the whole
basis upon which, uh, our education system
from early childhood to, uh, primary school
was the best in the world, was very much to, due to, um,
Clarence Bebe and his wife during the forties, fifties
and sixties, we were the best, uh, national system
in developing children, uh,
in the late seventies and early eighties.
Development is from conception, a very good, uh,
uterus nurturing style of existence,
a nice birth and into a family where you are supported
and where your synapses are connected
and developed so that you as a human person
are developing the whole of yourself.
We found in New Zealand that
that was the way in which we were working
as teachers developing the whole person.
Since the, um, 1980s,
there has been a dismemberment
of this particular way of practicing in the learning
institutions, especially in primary school.
And that is first of all, by having behavior modification
as the main form of, um,
main form of, uh, classroom management.
And I know that that was presented by, uh, Don Brown,
who was the chief psychologist for the Department
of Education, who was one of my early mentors.
I was a research assistant with him,
and I saw what was going on four years later when I was, uh,
picked to be the fourth
regional psychologist for social welfare.
I had a public conversation with Don Brown,
and he said, human beings do not have
feelings, no emotions.
So that gives you some idea what happened.
The second thing was tomorrow's schools,
and I could talk to you for hours, days, weeks on
what happened and that,
but I was very involved at the many different levels when
that came into consideration.
The main thing is teachers went from being collaborative
within schools and between schools
to becoming highly competitive.
We introduced data collection.
That data collection was basically in crude terms,
s**t, in s**t out.
It was terrible. It was useless.
The policy people had no idea because they weren't teachers,
and they used that information incorrectly.
Then we had problems in the classrooms, lack
of resources, lack of equity.
We had, um, devices being used, we had problem with reading.
So then of course, we had the whole phonic nonsense
introduced, which created chaos for so many teachers.
Now, I don't expect that anyone take much notice of
what I have to say in five minutes trying to cover 60, uh,
years of my involvement.
But, uh, 30 years ago with a national government,
I presented a model that I was working on then,
and it now still exists as the RTLB
and I believe it is still in existence now.
All I'm doing here really is hoping that Hansard,
which reported my information 30 years ago,
might report a little bit of the history
of what is happening.
And in the last two
or three years, we have found
that there is a complete smashing of what was one
of the best early childhood education systems in the,
in the world is now becoming a complete shambles,
and that's due to this terrible legislation
that's going on the last two or three years.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Bruce.
Thank you for making yourself
available to us this afternoon.
We do appreciate your participation, uh, in this process.
We'll move on now, uh, to Therese Ford, who I'm assuming is,
uh, Dr.
Traces. It doesn't say whether
they're in person or online.
Oh, there we go. Oh, look at that.
You need a concession card.
Therese, get the 10th one for free.
Over to you. You, we Your microphone's still on
as still off, sorry.
There you go. Yep. Now that five minutes is yours.
Over to you.
Uh, Kiko. I don't need to, uh, reintroduce myself.
I have, um, yeah, presented earlier from both
of the organizations I represent
and earlier today from the iwi that I descend from.
So this submission is my own individual submission,
and I want to focus on two concerns
that I've raised in the written submission.
The first is ministerial power over curriculum,
and the second is the erosion of
or obligations.
My message is simple educators
and boards who work in relationship with their hapu and iwi
and their local communities understand education best.
I'm here to express my strong opposition to the bill
because it seeks to locate an unprecedented
and frankly, dangerous amount of power
with the minister's office.
So ministerial power over the curriculum,
the curriculum is more than a list of topics.
It's more than a set of standardized assessments,
and it's more than a reconfigured grading system.
The curriculum captures what we want
to remember about our past,
what we believe about the present,
and it is a manifesto of our aspirations for the future,
for the next generation.
This bill grants the minister a unilateral authority
to make prescriptive changes to the curriculum.
Without iwi and hapu involvement
and without sector consultation,
education should not be a top down political tool.
It must be grounded in the unique needs of our learners.
By bypassing Maori authority
and the expertise of the teaching profession,
we risk a homogenizing curriculum
that ignores the diverse realities
of New Zealand classrooms.
I recommend that the committee amend the bill
to make consultation with Iwi Hapu
and the education sector mandatory for any curriculum
or professional standard changes
the erosion of TEI ORI obligations.
I know I've made this point in earlier submissions,
but quite frankly, we cannot make it too many times.
In al New Zealand, tei
ORI is fundamental to our past,
our present, and our future.
It therefore must be respectfully
and authentically embedded throughout the curriculum,
is what ensures our curriculum blueprint for learning
is from about
and for us, Al Tam of New Zealand,
the bill seeks to repeal the requirement for school boards
to give effect to Titi.
This is a significant backward step for equity.
Section 27 2 E of the current act is a vital
safeguard, removing its risks, weakening Maori culture,
language, and the equitable outcomes.
We have worked for decades to improve.
We cannot claim to be a modern inclusive society
if we legislatively erase our commitment
to Titi in our schools.
I've had the privilege of representing
our community on boards
of trustees at a primary school board
and at a secondary school board.
And over that time, so across 16 years
each year, we have had determined engagement with Hapu
and Iwi in this area,
and as a result,
our strategic planning has been strengthened.
Feedback from our students
and whanau have reflected that engagement
has increased, and this has happened alongside increased
educational achievement.
And we would expect that
because this is what evidence shows,
I recommend that we retain the existing legal obligations
for school boards to hold te or wa.
In summary, if we look at a macro view,
this bill replaces a high trust model
of professional expertise with one of centralized
ministerial control.
When we concentrate this much power in one office,
we risk making our children's education subject to the whims
of political cycles rather than on pedagogical evidence.
I urged the committee to reject this bill in its entirety
to protect and in doing so,
protect the integrity of our schools
and the futures of our tam.
Thank you very much, tres,
and thank you for your participation in this process.
Um, that's all the time we've got for you this afternoon,
and we'll move on now to Joanne Doyle, who we have
with us online.
Nice. Well,
Hi, Good afternoon.
Welcome. Everything's working.
We've got five minutes with you this afternoon, Joanne.
It's, uh, yours to do with as you wish.
Includes time for questions Over
To You. Thank you.
Chair members of the committee thank you
for the opportunity to speak today.
My name is Joanne Doyle,
and I'm a school leader in a rural Catholic primary
school in Yor.
I appear before you in opposition to the education
and training amendment bill, informed
by lived leadership experience
and principles consistently advocated through
Catholic education in the
New Zealand Catholic Education Office.
I wanna begin with place
because where a child lives should never determine the
quality of their education, yet legislation has the power
to either reduce inequity or de
or deepen it, why,
or has one of the highest proportions
of Maori residents in the country.
Second only to the Chatham Islands,
and we sit within the highest levels
of socioeconomic deprivation.
These are not abstract statistics.
They shape wellbeing, attendance, achievement,
and what schools must do every day
to support children and their whanau.
In communities like ours,
schools are far from more than places of learning.
They are hubs of stability, belonging,
cultural identity, and connection.
Often the school is the most consistent support
in a child's life.
Because of this, local governance is not optional.
It's essential local voice and decision making.
Catholic education is grounded in the principle of subsid.
That decision should be made as close
as possible to the child.
This reflects a commitment to human dignity
and thriving communities.
This bull moves us in the opposite direction
by centralizing authority
and weakening locally elected school boards.
In wro, our board represents whanau, voice, iwi,
partnerships, parish connection,
and deep cultural understanding.
When decision making shifts away from communities,
the risk is clear.
Those who know the child least
gain the greatest influence over their education.
New Zealand Catholic education office has consistently
supported strong local governance
to protect special character, uphold parental choice,
and ensure schools remain responsive to community need.
I echo that position today.
Maori partnership
and ti in a high Maori community partnership
cannot be symbolic.
It must be relational and local.
Our commitment to tii is expressed through daily engagement
with whanau, hapu, and iwi.
These relationships are built on trust, presence
and presence, not distant oversight,
weakening local governance risk silencing the very voices
education policy seeks to uplift.
If we are serious about equity for Maori learners,
we must protect their structures
that enable shared decision making.
Centralization does not build trust.
Relationships do deprivation and rural reality.
Flexibility is not a luxury in a high
deprivation communities.
It is a necessity.
Our educators respond daily to complex realities,
including housing instability, transport barriers, trauma
and ongoing recovery Following Cyclone Gabriel,
when authority moves further from community responsiveness
slows yet children facing hardship cannot wait
for layered processes.
They need schools empowered to act quickly, compassionately,
and with professional judgment.
Centralized models, risk replacing responsiveness
with compliance and compliance does not
change a child's life.
Relationships do trust in educators.
The bill also signals a concerning lack
of trust in school leaders and teachers.
Catholic schools already operate within strong
accountability frameworks, including a reviews proprietor,
oversight, professional standards
and community accountability.
We are not asking for less accountability, we're asking
for balanced accountability that still allows us to lead.
Strong education systems are built on professional trust,
not increasing layers of control.
In closing, I ask the committee to consider carefully
who is most affected when decision making moves further
from the community.
It will not be the well-resourced schools,
it'll be communities like communities
with high Maori populations, high deprivation
and daily commitment to overcoming inequity.
I therefore urge the committee to reject this bill
or significantly amend it to one,
protect strong local governance.
Two, recognize high Maori and high deprivation communities.
Three, uphold TE treaty through genuine partnership.
Four, safeguard Catholic and special character education
and five, to trust the professionalism of educators.
Strong education systems are built on trust, relationships
and community voice.
This bull moves us further from these foundations.
Thank you for your time and your service
to the children of alt.
Thank you Joe, and thank you so much
for your participation in this process.
We do appreciate it. Now,
that's all the time we have for you this afternoon.
Uh, so we will be moving on now, uh, to
a short break and proceeding.
So, uh, we'll go into private session
and we'll be back at 4:10 PM Thank you.
Um, my name's Carl Bates.
I'm the deputy chair standing in for,
or sitting in for Katie for a few minutes.
Um, so invite Alistair to the table please.
Sure. To Alistair, we've got, um, five minutes
with you this afternoon, including any time
for questions over to you.
Thank you. Um, thank you for the opportunity to speak.
I'm speaking today in support of my submission,
which centered around the section, um, in the education
and training system, reform amendment bill about the
minister's discretion to set how
and what teachers, uh, teach in class.
Um, I'm a teacher of roughly 26 years experience having
started in 1999.
Um, and I see that this amendment gives
the minister the power to change curriculum statements
herself and without review from teachers, uh,
this is structurally unusual in modern democracies
where it is accepted that the minister work
with experts in the field.
Um, I heard you chuckling about, uh, the gas just
before with the Minister of energy decide himself
to open a new offshore gas field without engineering
and financial expert advice.
Um, I think, you know, advice does need to be taken.
Our graduates, um,
from our schools are in huge demand in Australia and England
and top paying jobs from medicine to engineering.
They are immensely valued.
Our top graduates take places in Ivy League universities in
the states, um, and we do have a wonderful, uh, curriculum
and education system.
I think, um, before we consider this precise bill itself,
it is important for all of us
to get real about the lowest average academic results coming
from the impoverished communities of our country.
But to the point itself about the minister's sole right
to change the curriculum, um, firstly the cynicism
and, and disengagement.
I see even in my youngest colleagues, change has become
so haphazard that in the last two years it has been unclear
which curriculum we were supposed to be teaching, um,
with trial periods, soft launches in this year, stage entry
by year levels nine and 10
and, uh, resources landed four years, nine
and 10 in my, in my inbox today.
Um, which doesn't gimme much time to implement them
or integrate 'em into my existing planning.
My year 12 and 13 classes are still being assessed under
standards, um, under the curriculum
or under standards written from the 2007 curriculum.
Um, and I'd like to thank Minister Sanford, uh,
who has given us this certainty and, and to us.
Curriculum changes are really often different labels
for the same thing, and I find I'm still teaching many
of the same skills I always taught since I began in 1999.
I have taught paragraph structure, creative writing,
short story and essay skills.
Uh, and the thing that changes the most
are the curriculum statements.
Essay writing was called transactional writing in unit
standard days, and then it became formal writing
as the achievement standards were introduced.
Um, it's also called expository writing,
and this year we look to the curriculum documents
and find it is called discursive writing.
When we look these words up in the staff room,
we find they are synonymous
and broad terms that renders the change moot.
It engenders cynicism of the curriculum documents
that are issued, um,
and takes time away from, uh, those things that
our managers could be better be doing.
Secondly, we must have room for individual interested
and passionate teachers.
Robotic delivery of someone else's choices is a massive
turnoff for our young people, uh,
and we work hard to get their buy-in, um,
with our personalities and our passions.
Thirdly, the ministerial curriculums put out
for review over the last year have been ridiculously hard.
My colleagues are ambitious and talented,
and we work at a high performing school where most parents
of students are university educated and we do very well,
but colleagues have been aghast at the proposals.
Genetics usually taught in year 11, science was
to be introduced in primary school.
English, which had far more reading than any team could cope
with, was an invitation to students to go to AI summaries.
AI itself is not mentioned
and its place needs to be addressed now
and any theory of learning
and the social science curriculum, which colleagues told me,
had year four students,
nine year olds studying Russo's theory of nature
and the demographic transgression model in intermediate
school shows just how easy it is to be way too ambitious
and unrealistic about what our young ones can manage.
Uh, these curriculums have either already
or soon probably will be adjusted to teacher feedback
as should be the case and
as should be reflected in in this act.
Uh, my fourth
and final point, um,
comes from Bronwyn Wood Associate Professor Victoria
University School of Education,
who addressed our school cluster about two years ago
and said, you know, we must not let the pendulum swing
wildly back and forth, uh, such as
between a skills curriculum
and a knowledge curriculum between phonics
and whole language reading between student-centered
and teacher-centered learning.
Um, my recommendation is that the structure
of the education system, um,
and the legislation must place the minister in a position
to make a balanced judgment, uh,
from experts in the field rather than have sole
discretion. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Alistair.
That's all the time we have for you today,
so we appreciate your much participation in the process.
Thank you. Next up we have NZDI, Tero
and person welcome.
We have 10 minutes with you today.
That includes time for questions.
Do take your submission as read over to you.
We've got one coming online.
Do you have one online? Do you Yes, that's fine. Yeah.
Um, secretariat is aware of that. Hopefully they're ready.
I would say just in the instance, um, interest
of time do get started if
unless they're leading off. Mm-hmm.
Yep. Um, um,
I've already introduced myself previously.
This is me with my NDDI, uh,
president head, but thank you.
Anyway for the, the opportunity to meet
with the select command
to discuss our concerns with the bill.
We support the submissions made by PBTA
and the CTU our members
and the many other submitters who have clearly
and consistently pointed out the major flaws in this bill.
N-D-I-T-D law as a professional organization
and new representing 47,000 members employed as teachers
and leaders in the early childhood education
and primary sectors including,
and we also represent support staff from early childhood
through the secondary education school advisors, employers
by universities and learning support staff employed
by the Ministry of Education.
We are values led to t orang based organization.
As such, we support the submission made by Omo who we,
um, uh, who are we, we are member to,
and we are horrified that this bill will enable continual
breaches of the, by removing the responsibility to consult
with Maori on curriculum
and by legislating the demolition of the in schools.
We further want to express our disappointment at the process
by which this bill has been introduced.
The bill came at the end
of an incredibly busy school year involving significant
upheavals and curriculum, school governance
and school resourcing.
The select committee process sought
to accept submissions over the holiday program,
and this was not a good thing to do.
We can only conclude that the process was de was
deliberately timed to minimize public engagement
and in particular, to minimize the voice of educators.
Frankly, we are getting tired of engaging
with these processes when you,
the decision makers are not taking them seriously.
And where it is clear, there is no intention
of listening to feedback.
Members of the committee need to understand
that the education sectors faith
and trust in decision making, uh, in decision makers
and decision making processes is at a historical low.
Barbara, I'll hand over to Barbara.
Uh,
um, I'm a primary school teacher
and I'm an executive member of, um, THU Kiwi
and AI's governance organization
and a, a member of our COPA Moreau,
our curriculum subcommittee.
I'm really deeply concerned that we as the teachers
and school leaders who will ultimately be responsible
for implementing the rafts of changes in this bill,
remain in the dark about the supposed problems
that this bill pretends to or portends to fix.
What is clear is that this bill will fundamentally shift the
definition and purpose of a national curriculum in roa.
Given the significance of this change, we are alarmed
that no regulatory impact statement was
prepared for this part of the bill.
In supporting this bill,
you support shutting out the very experts
and community voices required to create strong curriculum
for all of Rikki with broad sector buy-in.
So I ask the committee members currently in government,
are you comfortable with granting the Minister
of Education power to accept curriculum statements directly
regardless of their qualifications?
Without the wisdom of the education sector,
will your parties still support this amendment under a
different government and a different minister?
It is not clear to me that you have fully thought
through the long-term implications of this change.
As educators, we know how important it is
to have a successful curriculum to achieve.
This requires deep subject knowledge across all learning
areas, expertise in direct curriculum, design, pedagogy,
and child development.
This can only be achieved when the whole sector is involved
at experts in those areas lead the work.
Such work was well underway following the 2018
Rega education conversations,
and this bill rep reverses nearly t 10 years
of progress towards a better education system.
Ultimately, this is all about tamrin.
When experts are shut out,
when community voices are ignored, the learning, the culture
and developmental needs of TAM
and all the diversity is put at risk.
We deeply, deeply fear
that this bill will result in undermining children's
confidence in their own learning.
Is this a risk that the select committee is willing to take?
Um, we think it's important to emphasize as,
as Barbara's already talked about
and many other submitters,
that this bill further politicizes the education system,
leaving it vulnerable to constant change where politicians,
not educators, design our curriculum
and set the standards for how and what our tamari learn.
Um, this is something that you do not see in high performing
education systems where there is a political consensus
and it's left to the educators, the experts working with,
in our case Maori with parents
to really develop a curriculum that is fit
for purpose for tamari.
And, um, we point out
that a similar objection about the politicization
of the curriculum was made by the New Zealand initiative
and their submission last year on the Education
and Training Act amendment bill number two,
where they explicitly identified politicization
as the outcome of increased ministerial influence over the
teaching council, which is indeed
a feature of the present bill.
I think that shows the broad spectrum of opposition to
that change in particular,
and it's something we constantly hear from teachers.
They want to work outside of politics,
they want an education system that they can get on with
and do what they know is best
for children rather than the swinging
to and fro that we've seen.
Um, so, um, in terms of the bill
and the Teaching Council, um, by stripping it
of its professional responsibilities
and by tipping the balance of power away from the profession
to the minister and its governing council,
this bill also puts, um, the teaching standard
for kako at risk.
It's the firm position of Nura that what is good
for tamari Maori is good for all tamari
and this bill takes it further in the opposite direction.
Um, finally we wanted
to note our concerns about the highly unorthodox way.
The proposal to transfer ECE regulatory functions from the
Ministry of Education to the Education Review Office
was included in the scope of the select committee process,
when in fact such a proposal's not included in the bill.
Uh, we are not sure how the committee expects the sector
to give feedback on such a proposal, um, which on the face
of it we don't support when we haven't seen it.
We believe that this dele legitimizes that part
of the select committee process
and would suggest the committee ask the minister to go back
and do things the proper way.
So I guess you can hear
that there's a strong concern about process,
strong concern about, uh, the politicization
of decision making and education.
And given that legislation has passed, not just
for this parliament, but for many more to come,
I think this is something the committee really needs
to ponder very carefully. Thank you.
Thank you. We have time for one
question from Grant McCallan. Uh, yeah,
I've got a question around, around the teacher's council.
You highlighted here, um, uh, your concerns. I see.
How important is the credibility
of the Teacher's council to its role?
I think it's very important
and I think there's been a lot of noise, uh,
in the last couple of years, um, about the teaching council
and as peak bodies, um, the education peak bodies, um,
have already had a, an initial meeting
with the governing council and we intend to do
that more regularly, um,
because we are all made up of the teaching profession
and our memberships and we have a very strong interest in
having an independent and highly
professional teaching council.
Mm-hmm.
Thank you. Thank you very much
for making yourself available for us this afternoon.
We do appreciate your participation in the process.
We move on next to Lisa Steen.
I hopefully I have that right.
And Lisa, I wonder if you're in the room online. Right.
Cool. Great. So Lisa, if you could turn your camera
on your microphone on,
we have five minutes with you this afternoon.
Oh, we had you nearly, sorry.
Sorry About that. That's okay. No worries.
Five minutes is all yours
and that includes time for questions over to you.
Great. Thank you. Tato Cote.
I've been a secondary school teacher of science
and mathematics for over 11 years.
I've taught for eight years and tie up the West Coast.
And prior to that I taught for three years in Australia.
I have a PhD in Master's in Science, a diploma in teaching,
and a diploma in specialist teaching gifted education.
I strongly oppose the education
and training system reform amendment bill
and recommend that it does not go ahead
as it will harm students and society in a New Zealand
and plunge our education system into further chaos.
The concept of labeling schools
of serious concern is not helpful.
That school community is immediately stigmatized.
When I was young, my school was labeled one
of the worst in New Zealand, yet I went on to gain a PhD
and the ability to choose the path I wanted in life.
However, I never forgot
that my school was labeled this denigrating.
All the dedicated teachers committed students support
of whanau and the town and region as a whole.
The issue should have been addressed appropriately
with support after a full investigation.
It is unjust to be able to broadly label a school
as a problem when teachers have been crying
out for help for decades.
There needs to be more investment in teachers, um,
to address behavior problems and meet learning needs.
Two years ago, ERA reported on the impact
of worsening behavior in schools on teaching and learning,
but there has been nothing done to address these findings.
This is a definition of neglect.
There needs to be smaller class sizes
and more teacher aides.
This lack of resourcing in schools
is outrageous compared to in Australia.
According to the government website,
education counts funding for public schools was New Zealand,
$11,626 per student.
In 2024, the Australian Curriculum Assessment
and Reporting Authority states that in 2023,
Australian public schools were funded
24,857 Australian dollars per student,
which works out at about three
times the amount of New Zealand.
This is just one facet of the neglect
of the education system.
Another way that schools are being hampered by the lack
of support includes the review of NCA and the curriculum.
The rollout of each change has been a complete shambles.
The NCA changes to level one, were not ready
by the time we had to teach them.
And there was little guidance on
what the assessment would look like.
Teachers had to individually do the work to figure out what
to teach, how to teach it, and how to assess it
and then get judged on whether
or not it was okay afterwards,
which I can only assume meant they
picked whatever work looked good.
And then that was the new standard and criteria.
This was a phenomenal amount of work for teachers
of level one courses and has undermined the trust in the
leadership of the education system.
This is being now being repeated
with new curriculum areas being implemented
with ongoing updates
and resources not being ready or unusable.
Again, it's left to teachers to come up with resources
to teach and assist students.
How can a school be labeled
of serious concern against this backdrop
of being left completely alone to do the job
of a curriculum center, an assessment center learning
and behavior support,
and our own actual jobs as teachers, it's ridiculous.
It causes me moral injury
and exhaustion to be a witness to the neglect
and harm being done.
The proposed changes will worsen these problems,
allowing the minister to be able
to change the curriculum at well
going on the recent experiences.
I can only assume these changes will again,
not be supported by evidence.
They may be ideological, they'll ignore experts
and educators advice.
And the massive workload cost will again be imposed fully on
teachers with no resources provided
and insufficient information
provided in time that will help no students apart from
ensuring that privileged students retain their top position
as the MA majority suffer.
Thank you for your time, Kiara.
Thank you very much, Lisa.
We do appreciate your participation in this process
and being able to make the time
for us this afternoon. Thank
You. Thank you.
And we move on now to Susan Rito,
who we have on Zoom.
Welcome Susan. Thank you very much
for being with us this afternoon.
We have five minutes of time with you, uh, today.
That includes time for questions. So it's over to you now.
Members of the Education and Workforce Committee Co.
Susan Sandra ua.
I'm Professor of Education in TO Ihu
Waka, the College of Education at the University of Otago.
Thank you for inviting me.
I want to add to the weight of the submissions
that you've already heard imploring you
to reject the education
and training system reform bill in its entirety,
and I recommend that it not proceed.
This bill is undemocratic bestowing unprecedented powers
to the Minister of Education, ignoring
TGI discouraging collaboration
and converting teachers from professionals to technicians.
In my written submission, I highlighted concerns
with curriculum overreach
and the deprofessionalization of teachers.
Today I want to emphasize two further points.
Firstly, I want to draw attention to the quality
of the evidence being used to drive education policymaking.
I have time to briefly unpack one example.
The Minister of Education likes
to cite a 2024 education review office study
to justify changes to the teaching council
and initial teacher education.
In the Minister of Education's press release from
November, 2025,
she claimed the Education Review office found nearly two
thirds of principals report their
new teachers are unprepared.
However, there's no context for these claims.
The study surveyed 278 principles
and the nearly two thirds refers to 60%.
60% of 278 is 167 respondents.
There are currently about 2,500 principles in Alero
New Zealand according to figure nz.
So the study is actually referring
to the 6.68 per percent of principals
who reported their new teachers were unprepared.
So sample size is clearly a problem
and the Minister of Education has over generalized the
results from 167 principles to the entire country.
I would not claim to be a statistician,
but I'm pretty confident in saying
that 6.68% is not representative sample bias.
In this case. Self-selection
or voluntary response bias is always a concern
with survey research.
We don't know the motivation of the principles who elected
to respond.
Also, the group of recently graduated teachers at the heart
of their study had their programs interrupted by COVID,
which reduced their time in schools.
This disruption was recognized by the teaching council
and they differentiated the two year mentoring
and induction program to support them.
Despite these unacknowledged limitations, the study is used
to claim that the work of the teaching council,
setting teacher standards
and setting requirements for teacher training isn't working
and to justify legislative changes
to ensure stronger oversight and clear policy direction.
And ITE according to the minister's press release.
My point is not to discredit this one study, it's
to highlight the urgent need
to make explicit the research base that's being used
to justify sweeping changes in education.
The second point I wish
to make in my brief submission today comes from a critical
literacy reading of the bill.
A common critical literacy practice is to ask
what is missing from a text.
In the case of this bill, the voices of Tamari
and tataki are absent.
In the 2023 version of tejo, the New Zealand curriculum,
there was a vision for young people crafted
by the youth advisory group.
As many of you will not be familiar with it,
I'll read it in its entirety.
We the A of UA know our world is connected,
our wellbeing is collective
and that we have a shared responsibility to each other.
We understand our roles in giving effect its principles.
We are strong in our identities, languages, cultures,
beliefs, and values.
This means we can confidently carry
who we are wherever we go.
We have a strong sense of belonging.
This builds the foundation to be courageous, confident,
compassionate, and curious.
We understand that success can look different
for us all this means that we can learn
and grow from our experiences in a supportive environment.
We engage in learning that is meaningful us to us
and helps us in our lives.
We can build and navigate knowledge using our heads
and our hearts to make our decisions.
We are kaki of our environment.
We acknowledge and appreciate our differences in diverse
backgrounds and viewpoints.
We positively contribute to our communities,
alero and the world.
This vision has disappeared
as have their voices and conclusion.
A quality education system
rests on the shared responsibility named in the vision
for us here in ero, New Zealand.
That means we start with and we have ana educators
and researchers working together
to build an education system for this place.
I urge you to start again.
Thank you, Susan. We have,
that's all the time we have with you this afternoon.
So we do appreciate you making yourself available for us
and participating in this process.
Uh, we'll move on now to Jo, Jody. Alice,
Thank you for having me.
Thank you Susan. Uh, Jody I believe is online.
Jody, if you could, uh, turn your camera on
and your microphone on.
There we go. Go. Wonderful.
We have five minutes with you this afternoon.
That's your time, uh, as you would like to use it.
And that includes time for questions.
Okay. Uh, called
um, today I am wearing this t-shirt
to remind the select Finn the ass educators.
We are teaching our Tamari and ang
and in practice this means under the WA Treaty
of Ang, we are weaving meaningful, authentic relationships
between ourselves and the Tamari
and Ang as well as their whanau.
Um, every teacher knows that educating
children is made up of establishing
relationships that are meaningful and authentic.
And also, uh, the subject matter,
our local curriculum is so important
and really brings out the best of school communities.
Um, I was on a flight back from Wahi on, um,
yesterday and I was lucky enough to sit beside, um, two
Longhi Pakeha, um, who had just returned from a skiing,
snowboarding trip in Japan.
And we got talking
and it was a real joy to, um, hear the views of these,
um, young men.
Um, they were telling me how they, one was going to uni
and the other was at Wir College in Nelson.
And, um, we got talking about politics
and I asked them, you know,
which way they would probably vote.
The one next to me said he'd probably vote blue.
And I said, oh, that's really interesting.
And we'd already had the conversation about
how sick going to Yang was.
They'd each had that experience
and they were really, um, it was wonderful to hear
how enthusiastic they were about, um,
how we should be honoring the Treaty of wa tangi,
how should we should be treating Maori.
And I, so I asked them, well,
how do you think this current government is doing?
And the lad from
Wir College said, oh, I'm just really embarrassed
that our school is the only one in the Nelson region that
didn't, um, uh,
didn't join the thousand
or more other schools that wanted to commit
to upholding the or Yi.
And I just think
if you guys a national, you know,
what are you doing to continue
this amazing relationship that
Alang tahi have been brought up?
You know, in my submission I talked about how
we've been able to connect with local community
and, um, you know, uphold the treaty.
And,
Uh, I'm, I just, it, it's so
demoralizing for everyone to see things go backwards.
We really need to commit to
having, or as I said in my submission, I work
with a lot of Maori
and I've only got a five hour contract, guys.
I could be working full time with all the needs,
um,
want Maori in their lives.
Um, do you have any questions? Because
Thank you, Jody. Unfortunately,
that's all the time we
have for you this afternoon.
Uh, but we do appreciate you participating in this process
and, uh, making yourself available
for us this afternoon. So thank you.
Okay, thank you. If you could just get more funding
for teacher aids, that would be fabulous.
Thanks. Thanks, Jody.
Um, all right, we moved now to, um,
una who are in the room.
Welcome. We have Nadia, Han, Nadia and Sean.
I think if there's more of you, you welcome.
There's three seats at the table. You're welcome to join us.
We have, uh, 10 minutes with you today, uh,
as an organization, uh, do take us, your submission is read,
but you're welcome to use that 10 minutes as you wish,
and that includes time for questions.
Um, I'm the one of the parent representatives for
our immersion unit at URA Newtown School,
Uh, uh, coordin aua.
And I am alongside, um,
a parent represent rent representative on the school board.
So I think first of all, to Tahi, we want
to really acknowledge, uh, the rest of our board
for their contributions to the submission
because it was a collective effort.
In particular, Naomi Taylor who can't be here today,
she's actually been visiting, um, Katie and,
and, um, also our minute taker, Ash a*****e.
Well, for their contributions to our submission,
we want to mention our other parent representative
colleagues, Amor Fatima, Trey
and Janelle alongside Aki Nikki, who's here,
and our deputy principal Danielle and the teacher rep Reese.
Uh, we wanna make a note, I think to start with that we,
we are volunteers as school board representatives,
and you'll be familiar with that role.
And we do this, I think
because we're all united around not just the interests
of our children, but the interests
of all the learners at a coulda,
whether they be in the mainstream
or whether they'd be in the immersion class.
And I did think I'd share with you all that, um,
unlike people who may have had some professional time
to prepare for their submission,
we were on the weekends sitting together with our kids
who we invited to pretend to be politicians and sit
and listen to our submission.
And they concluded that they don't wanna become politicians.
So,
Um, Yeah, that, that was
Kia an idea.
Um, as mentioned in our written submission,
our school is culturally and linguistically vibrant,
and it's based in Newtown Wellington Nap.
Our school caters for in years one to six
in English medium
and offers Del Maori, um, in a bilingual program.
Our full immersion is
for students years one to eight,
and has been established for over 30 years.
We're proud to be a place
where Tamari can bring their cultures, languages,
and identities into their learning,
and where TGI provides a foundation
for belonging and partnership.
So we're taking our submission as red,
but we do wanna state that obviously we oppose the system,
the education and training system reform amendment bill.
We recommend that the bill does not progress,
and we have concerns about both specific amendments
and the overall direction of the reforms in the Bill
Copa. Maori approaches
to education would be further marginalized
by this bill because they cannot be delivered
without Tonga relationships.
At every level working together, kanohi is critical.
We want to give a couple of examples about our qda
and how our localized curriculum
and ability of our school principal
to make decisions about attendance valuable to us.
We believe that this bill has the potential
to put these two things at risk.
So just in first talking about the ministerial control
over curriculum, parents
and whanau across our school are actively engaged in
supporting education outcomes in both
of the language mediums.
For example, parents like ours
have organized language programs for students,
including Arabic lessons and Samoan Language Week.
We'll just refer you back to that point about being one
of the most linguistically diverse schools in the country.
Um, we've coordinated cultural events, including
for EED and Ali.
We're active members of the various ahu in NAA,
and provide also place-based education opportunities in the
Mata Mata Waka program
for Aang Maori across the entire school.
Centralizing the power of decision making
and shaping the curriculum through copa, such as these
will marginalize our voices in our own Kura community.
We've seen this in our recent submission
regarding the Disestablishment of resource teacher of Maori.
Despite our offer to speak with, despite our offer to speak
with Nazia, the minister has not engaged with us
as AL community.
We have received no response from the minister,
and the changes we're experiencing in education do not
reflect a good faith partnership with us as ua.
The lack of clarity in
how this bill will work gives us no confidence
that Copa Maori education will be supported
as the minister is not engaged with our community.
And now I'm going to speak to specifically the removal of
a principal's discretion over attendance exemptions.
Many of our tamari have valid reasons
for attendance exemptions linked with whanau
and supporting their cultural identities.
For Maori students specifically, it is important
that Kura attendance is not a barrier to attending copa.
In our iwi context,
attendance exemptions allow Al to attend Ang
and connect with knowledge of who we are as Maori.
This might be learning Maori in their own
or dialects on
or within the Iwi and hapu.
These opportunities give our tamari space
to express themselves as Maori on their UA
and with their people because our tamari come from
across ua.
These are things that our tamari cannot do in the classroom
and for most, most need
to travel away from where we live.
Understands and supports au in this
Yeah, like the uniqueness of our child,
of the child guide our work.
And I think just to conclude,
like we are concerned about the concentration of power
to the Minister of education.
And I think, you know, we might say that say for example,
a school principal could change,
but I think any of you will know, if you look
to your respective electorates, you might be able
to pick two schools that are completely different.
We're not making a case
that our school is any more unique than any other school.
In one of your electorates, you'll know about
that diversity of kura.
But what we will say is that, you know,
as parents in whanau, we want to be able
to have opportunities to engage and have levers to engage.
And while, you know, there could be an argument to be made
that you know that that ability will still exist.
We believe that this bill does remove some of the levers
that whanau currently have
and principles currently have to engage together
around decisions and things like, uh, curriculum,
localized curriculum and attendance.
Because, you know, by the very nature of being a minister
of education or being the Secretary of Education,
you're not gonna have time to engage
with the nuances of every learning community.
And that's not actually your mandate.
But when we're, when we can sit with our toki
and discuss things together, we have an ability to be able
to kind of come to a common ground around things
and have discussions,
and we're just simply not gonna have the access
around attendance and curriculum decisions
if those decisions are in the hands
of not just the current minister,
but future ministers for years to come.
So yeah. Thank you very much for your time today.
Thank you. Thank you both for making yourselves available
and for your support people as well.
It's really appreciated. Um, we have one time
for one quick question, grant.
Yeah. First of all, um, thank you for what you do
as volunteers and I, I've spent five years
to support cheer too, so, and I understand that.
Really appreciate it.
Um, so what, what I find is, um,
it's obviously very topical issues.
You, you make the comments here about you,
you're not keen on the wider reform agenda.
Well, the, the feedback I get from a range
of communities across the very broad electorate
of Northland, which is, you know, we've got the range of
and of, of, of all sorts of types of schools, is
that they're really, uh, enjoying, start
to really appreciate the ch the changes in the reforms
with the 'cause Their kids are starting to learn better
and results are starting to show that their maths and their,
and their, their reading and writing maths is improving.
It's noticeably. And, uh, so how do you, what do you say to
that given you're not so keen on overall reforms?
I'm sorry, could you please repeat the question? Yeah.
In terms of the feedback I get is what are the, what
the parents are getting are really pleased with the reforms
of that that we've been putting in place.
'cause the results their children are demonstrated.
This is a range of schools across, across my electorate.
What, what do you say to those parents
who say they're really pleased
with the outcomes from the reform agenda, which you say here
that you're not so keen on?
Is it those parents that are asking us that question?
Um, I'd be happy to have a conversation with other parents,
but, um, it's really hard for us
to contextualize their experiences
because we are speaking from our experiences.
Um, but I think we could also
defer to the rest of our ate
and come back to you on an answer.
Um, okay, that's fine.
Because we are only two people from,
from our full board. Yeah.
And I guess, Is there anything else you wanna add?
Just the emphasis on, I think
that sometimes these two things are put us competing,
that we talk about maths and literacy
and that's, that's kind of in the broader reform agenda.
But when you see that narrowing down that we've seen,
I think we just miss opportunities to have
that localized curriculum that we were talking about.
And those are the things that we've seen.
Our tam, especially when you have a school like ours
and Aku like ours, it's that sense of belonging that
actually, and this can sound like an airy fairy thing,
but it's real that makes them feel safe in the learning
environment and then sets that foundation so
that they can do the maths and literacy.
And I think that, that they don't need
to be mutually exclusive,
but we believe that sense of belonging to
where they are is really important
alongside the other stuff.
And so we don't see them as competing,
but we do see that foundation of belonging
and place-based education as really critical, particularly
for our learning community community.
But we can imagine for lots of them as well. Mm-hmm. Yeah.
Thank you very much and we really appreciate you making
yourselves available for us
and being part of this process, so I do appreciate it.
We will move on now.
Um, and actually just to note, appreciate your agility too,
because we had someone that wasn't available
who now is online.
Um, so we'll move now to Anna Williams.
I see Anna, you are already online ready to go.
If you could turn your microphone off on
and your camera on welcome.
We have with you this afternoon.
That includes time for questions.
Uh, so I will hand over to you now.
Well, thank you. Um, I will be nowhere near as organized
as the last two, uh, people sharing
because I have just come off the back of a,
the first day back with the kids.
So I've been spending more time
and energy on my planning than my submission.
So, um, I guess the first part we would take is read, um,
where I'm, where I've introduced myself.
I mean, I guess the most important thing is the fact
that I'm a kayak at a lovely little rural school called
Aura out in, um, out from Walkworth in Auckland.
And, um, that my,
uh, overall I strongly oppose this bill in its entirety
and I've got some specific current concerns
regarding the aspects of the bill,
which I outlined in my submission.
And that was, um, attendance exemptions.
Um, I don't know, I don't think I really need to repeat.
Do I need to repeat it or No,
No. And and you can take
your submission as read, so feel free
to highlight the important things. Okay, cool.
Yeah, well, I mean, for me, the attendance exemptions,
that's a, for me, I feel a lot of that discretion needs
to be with principals.
Um, 'cause they're a lot of, yeah, I feel it's,
it's removing too much of their professional discretion.
Um, setting curriculum statements.
Um, this for me as a teacher, I think is a really,
a really big one because, um,
giving power to the Minister of Minister of Education
to set curriculum statements without review
or report by the Ministry
of Education is, is very concerning.
Um, in my opinion.
We've seen the Minister
of Education overstep her position on many occasions.
Um, and in terms of the curriculum amendments,
that may be my perception.
Um, but that's, that's how it felt, it seems to me.
Um, yeah,
and I think the inclusion of this amendment
will increase this, and I think it's really important
that we balance politics
and education in the right way.
Um, when ministerial directions,
it's one thing to suggest
that we could go down a certain track,
but I think it's really important
that curriculum is developed by educators
or people with an education background.
Um, and I was slightly concerned
with the other curriculums where the
contributors were reduced, which I think, yeah,
that's a whole nother thing.
Um, amendments to section 90 and insertions of 90 A
and 90 B will shift what are currently democratically
and professionally shaped national,
national curriculum statements into direct ministerial
and political control.
The, the power for a minister
to change curriculum statements without consultation
is incredibly worrying
because that is more of a direction that I feel the
ministry themselves, um, and educators should be making.
Um, the impact to schools in regards to local curriculum,
which was mentioned by the previous submitters, um,
is, is quite large.
And I feel that that undermines us
and our expertise as educators.
Um, there are impacts on ma Maori
and Maori and the place within the context of the school
and in individual school and community.
Um, it becomes more about politics than education.
Um, and while politics is,
is greatly appropriate in a, um, uh,
social sciences class where you're looking at politics, um,
I think it, there's a time
and a place, um,
educational decisions shouldn't be solely made
by politicians, ultimately for me.
Um, and I'd also like
to see a regulatory impact statement for this.
Um, especially as it will likely have risks
that would be difficult
to address should the amendments be made.
The other one is, um, removing the professional functions
of the teaching Council.
Um, my opinion is that this should be kept independently
of the Ministry of Education or Ministry of Education, um,
and that, uh, the teaching council should be
democratically elected members so that that balance
of power is maintained, uh,
state schools of serious concern.
Um, the performative approach is, um,
doesn't sit overly well with me.
I know I'm not being particularly, uh,
succinct with my words today.
I'm very tired of teaching.
Um, yeah, I, I believe it's really important that
that is a demo, democratic process.
Um, establishment of a new school property agency.
That's probably more a thing
that my principal would've an issue with.
And my board, um,
and my, um, system monitoring studies,
uh, I think, um, there's,
I guess there's a lot of concern around, um, the
compulsory participation.
Um, and that to some extent, some of this should be up
to the, um, educators themselves
or the, the principals
and the board in terms of what's required.
Because some things work for some, some things don't, um,
work necessary for everyone.
Um, ministerial decision making with regard to
what assessments are or are not appropriate
and what success looks like might not match that setting.
Um, and sort of opens the door to standardized testing,
which does not suit all students.
Um,
Mm-hmm. No, look, sorry
to interrupt you,
but we have gone over time.
No, sorry. Would you really appreciate your participation?
No, don't apologize. It's a very constructive submission,
so we really appreciate it.
Uh, thank you for making yourself available for our, um,
for being part of this process
and appreciate it at the end of this long day
End day. Thank you very much.
Yes. A very long day,
which is still continuing.
Alright, thank you very much.
We relate. Alright.
Um, so we are just waiting for James Barbara to install.
Um, but I think that we've got officials
that we'd like to meet with, so I am just, um,
thinking out loud that, is this the last submission
or have we got a new set of submissions on Wednesday
or another set of submissions on we Wednesday?
It could be another opportunity on
Wednesday, but not outside school.
No. Okay. Right.
Just give another minute
and then I think
we'll make that call.
Sorry folks. Bear with us.
No sign. Okay.
Alright, we'll move out
of public session into private session and we'll reschedule.
Um, James, if we can, thank you everybody.
If we can go into private session position.